biography of Swami Vivekananda
by SWAMI  NIKHILANANDA 


RAMAKRISHNA-VIVEKANANDA  CENTER  OF  NEW  YORK 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2018  with  funding  from 
Public.Resource.Org 


https://archive.org/details/vivekanandabiogr00swam 


PREFACE 


Swami  Vivekananda’s  inspiring  personality  was  well  known  both  in  India  and 
in  America  during  the  last  decade  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  the  first  decade 
of  the  twentieth.  The  unknown  monk  of  India  suddenly  leapt  into  fame  at  the 
Parliament  of  Religions  held  in  Chicago  in  1893,  at  which  he  represented 
Hinduism.  His  vast  knowledge  of  Eastern  and  Western  culture  as  well  as  his 
deep  spiritual  insight,  fervid  eloquence,  brilliant  conversation,  broad  human 
sympathy,  colourful  personality,  and  handsome  figure  made  an  irresistible  appeal 
to  the  many  types  of  Americans  who  came  in  contact  with  him.  People  who  saw 
or  heard  Vivekananda  even  once  still  cherish  his  memory  after  a  lapse  of  more 
than  half  a  century. 

In  America  Vivekananda’s  mission  was  the  interpretation  of  India’s  spiritual 
culture,  especially  in  its  Vedantic  setting.  He  also  tried  to  enrich  the  religious 
consciousness  of  the  Americans  through  the  rational  and  humanistic  teachings 
of  the  Vedanta  philosophy.  In  America  he  became  India’s  spiritual  ambassador 
and  pleaded  eloquently  for  better  understanding  between  India  and  the  New 
World  in  order  to  create  a  healthy  synthesis  of  East  and  West,  of  religion  and 
science. 

In  his  own  motherland  Vivekananda  is  regarded  as  the  patriot  saint  of  modern 
India  and  an  inspirer  of  her  dormant  national  consciousness.  To  the  Hindus 
he  preached  the  ideal  of  a  strength-giving  and  man-making  religion.  Service  to 
man  as  the  visible  manifestation  of  the  Godhead  was  the  special  form  of  wor¬ 
ship  he  advocated  for  the  Indians,  devoted  as  they  were  to  the  rituals  and  myths 
of  their  ancient  faith.  Many  political  leaders  of  India  have  publicly  acknowl¬ 
edged  their  indebtedness  to  Swami  Vivekananda. 

The  Swami’s  mission  was  both  national  and  international.  A  lover  of  mankind, 
he  strove  to  promote  peace  and  human  brotherhood  on  the  spiritual  foundation 
of  the  Vedantic  Oneness  of  existence.  A  mystic  of  the  highest  order,  Vive¬ 
kananda  had  a  direct  and  intuitive  experience  of  Reality.  He  derived  his  ideas 
from  that  unfailing  source  of  wisdom  and  often  presented  them  in  the  soul¬ 
stirring  language  of  poetry. 

The  natural  tendency  of  Vivekananda’s  mind,  like  that  of  his  Master,  Rama- 
krishna,  was  to  soar  above  the  world  and  forget  itself  in  contemplation  of  the 
Absolute.  But  another  part  of  his  personality  bled  at  the  sight  of  human  suffer¬ 
ing  in  East  and  West  alike.  It  might  appear  that  his  mind  seldom  found  a  point 
of  rest  in  its  oscillation  between  contemplation  of  God  and  service  to  man.  Be 
that  as  it  may,  he  chose,  in  obedience  to  a  higher  call,  service  to  man  as  his 
mission  on  earth;  and  this  choice  has  endeared  him  to  people  in  the  West, 
Americans  in  particular. 


v 


VI 


Preface 


In  the  course  of  a  short  life  of  thirty-nine  years  (1863-1902),  of  which  only 
ten  were  devoted  to  public  activities — -and  those,  too,  in  the  midst  of  acute 
physical  suffering — he  left  for  posterity  his  four  classics:  Jnana-Yoga,  Bhakti- 
Yoga,  Karma-Yoga ,  and  Raja-Yoga ,  all  of  which  are  outstanding  treatises  on 
Hindu  philosophy.  In  addition,  he  delivered  innumerable  lectures,  wrote  inspired 
letters  in  his  own  hand  to  his  many  friends  and  disciples,  composed  numerous 
poems,  and  acted  as  spiritual  guide  to  the  many  seekers  who  came  to  him  for 
instruction.  He  also  organized  the  Ramakrishna  Order  of  monks,  which  is  the 
most  outstanding  religious  organization  of  modern  India.  It  is  devoted  to  the 
propagation  of  the  Hindu  spiritual  culture  not  only  in  the  Swami's  native  land, 
but  also  in  America  and  in  other  parts  of  the  world. 

Swami  Vivekananda  once  spoke  of  himself  as  a  “condensed  India/'  His  life 
and  teachings  are  of  inestimable  value  to  the  West  for  an  understanding  of  the 
mind  of  Asia.  William  James,  the  Harvard  philosopher,  called  the  Swami  the 
“paragon  of  Vedantists."  Max  Muller  and  Paul  Deussen,  the  famous  Orientalists 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  held  him  in  genuine  respect  and  affection.  “His 
words,"  writes  Romain  Rolland,  “are  great  music,  phrases  in  the  style  of 
Beethoven,  stirring  rhythms  like  the  march  of  Handel  choruses.  I  cannot  touch 
these  sayings  of  his,  scattered  as  they  are  through  the  pages  of  books,  at  thirty 
years'  distance,  without  receiving  a  thrill  through  my  body  like  an  electric  shock. 
And  what  shocks,  what  transports,  must  have  been  produced  when  in  burning 
words  they  issued  from  the  lips  of  the  hero!" 

Nikhilananda 


VIVEKANANDA 


VlVEKANANDA  IN  MEDITATION 


VIVEKANANDA 


Swami  Vivekananda,  the  great  soul  loved  and  revered  in  East  and  West  alike 
as  the  rejuvenator  of  Hinduism  in  India  and  the  preacher  of  its  eternal 
truths  abroad,  was  born  at  6:49,  a  few  minutes  after  sunrise,  on  Monday, 
January  12,  1863.  It  was  the  day  of  the  great  Hindu  festival  Makarasamkranti, 
when  special  worship  is  offered  to  the  Ganges  by  millions  of  devotees.  Thus 
the  future  Vivekananda  first  drew  breath  when  the  air  above  the  sacred  river 
not  far  from  the  house  was  reverberating  with  the  prayers,  worship,  and  religious 
music  of  thousands  of  Hindu  men  and  women. 

While  Vivekananda  was  still  in  his  mother’s  womb,  she,  like  many  other 
pious  Hindu  mothers,  had  observed  religious  vows,  fasted,  and  prayed  so  that 
she  might  be  blessed  with  a  son  who  would  do  honour  to  the  family.  She 
requested  a  relative  who  was  living  in  Benares  to  offer  special  worship  to  the 
Vireswara  Siva  of  that  holy  place  and  seek  His  blessings;  for  Siva,  the  great  god 
of  renunciation,  dominated  her  thought.  One  night  she  dreamt  that  this 
supreme  Deity  aroused  Himself  from  His  meditation  and  agreed  to  be  born  as 
her  son.  When  she  woke  she  was  filled  with  joy. 

The  mother,  Bhuvaneswari  Devi,  accepted  the  child  as  a  boon  from  Vireswara 
Siva  and  named  him  Vireswara.  The  family,  however,  gave  him  the  name  of 
Narendranath  Datta,  calling  him,  for  short,  Narendra,  or  more  endearingly, 
Naren. 

The  Datta  family  of  Calcutta,  into  which  Narendranath  had  been  born,  was 
well  known  for  its  affluence,  philanthropy,  scholarship,  and  independent  spirit. 
The  grandfather,  Durgacharan,  after  the  birth  of  his  first  son,  had  renounced 
the  world  in  search  of  God.  The  father,  Viswanath,  an  attorney-at-law  of  the 
High  Court  of  Calcutta,  was  versed  in  English  and  Persian  literature  and  often 
entertained  himself  and  his  friends  by  reciting  from  the  Bible  and  the  poetry 
of  Hafiz,  both  of  which,  he  believed,  contained  truths  unmatched  by  human 
thinking  elsewhere.  He  was  particularly  attracted  to  the  Islamic  culture,  with 
which  he  was  familiar  because  of  his  close  contact  with  the  educated  Moslems 
of  Northwestern  India.  Moreover,  he  derived  a  large  income  from  his  law 
practice  and,  unlike  his  father,  thoroughly  enjoyed  the  worldly  life.  An  expert 
in  cookery,  he  prepared  rare  dishes  and  liked  to  share  them  with  his  friends. 
Travel  was  another  of  his  hobbies.  Though  agnostic  in  religion  and  a  mocker 
of  social  conventions,  he  possessed  a  large  heart  and  often  went  out  of  his  way 
to  support  idle  relatives,  some  of  whom  were  given  to  drunkenness.  Once,  when 
Narendra  protested  against  this  lack  of  judgement,  his  father  said:  “How  can 

1 


2 


Vivekananda 


you  understand  the  great  misery  of  human  life?  When  you  realize  the  depths 
of  men’s  suffering,  you  will  sympathize  with  these  unfortunate  creatures  who 
try  to  forget  their  sorrows,  even  though  only  for  a  short  while,  in  the  oblivion 
created  by  intoxicating  drink.”  Naren’s  father,  however,  kept  a  sharp  eye  on 
his  children  gnd  would  not  tolerate  the  slightest  deviation  from  good  manners. 

Bhuvaneswari  Devi,  the  mother,  was  cast  in  a  different  mould.  Regal  in 
appearance  and  gracious  in  conduct,  she  belonged  to  the  old  tradition  of  Hindu 
womanhood.  As  mistress  of  a  large  household,  she  devoted  her  spare  time  to 
sewing  and  singing,  being  particularly  fond  of  the  great  Indian  epics,  the 
Ramayana  and  the  Mahabharata,  large  portions  of  which  she  had  memorized. 
She  became  the  special  refuge  of  the  poor,  and  commanded  universal  respect 
because  of  her  calm  resignation  to  God,  her  inner  tranquillity,  and  her  dignified 
detachment  in  the  midst  of  her  many  arduous  duties.  Two  sons  were  born  to 
her  besides  Narendranath,  and  four  daughters,  two  of  whom  died  at  an  early  age. 

Narendra  grew  up  to  be  a  sweet,  sunny-tempered,  but  very  restless  boy.  Two 
nurses  were  necessary  to  keep  his  exuberant  energy  under  control,  and  he  was 
a  great  tease  to  his  sisters.  In  order  to  quiet  him,  the  mother  often  put  his  head 
under  the  cold-water  tap,  repeating  Siva’s  name,  which  always  produced  the 
desired  effect.  Naren  felt  a  child’s  love  of  birds  and  animals,  and  this  charac¬ 
teristic  reappeared  during  the  last  days  of  his  life.  Among  his  boyhood  pets 
were  a  family  cow,  a  monkey,  a  goat,  a  peacock,  and  several  pigeons  and 
guinea-pigs.  The  coachman  of  the  family,  with  his  turban,  whip,  and  bright- 
coloured  livery,  was  his  boyhood  ideal  of  a  magnificent  person,  and  he  often 
expressed  the  ambition  to  be  like  him  when  he  grew  up. 

Narendra  bore  a  striking  resemblance  to  the  grandfather  who  had  renounced 
the  world  to  lead  a  monastic  life,  and  many  thought  that  the  latter  had  been 
reborn  in  him.  The  youngster  developed  a  special  fancy  for  wandering  monks, 
whose  very  sight  would  greatly  excite  him.  One  day  when  such  a  monk  appeared 
at  the  door  and  asked  for  alms,  Narendra  gave  him  his  only  possession,  the 
tiny  piece  of  new  cloth  that  was  wrapped  round  his  waist.  Thereafter,  when¬ 
ever  a  monk  was  seen  in  the  neighbourhood,  Narendra  would  be  locked  in  a 
room.  But  even  then  he  would  throw  out  of  the  window  whatever  he  found 
near  at  hand  as  an  offering  to  the  holy  man.  In  the  meantime,  he  was  receiving 
his  early  education  from  his  mother,  who  taught  him  the  Bengali  alphabet 
and  his  first  English  words,  as  well  as  stories  from  the  Ramayana  and  the 
Mahabharata . 

During  his  childhood  Narendra,  like  many  other  Hindu  children  of  his  age, 
developed  a  love  for  the  Hindu  deities,  of  whom  he  had  learnt  from  his  mother. 
Particularly  attracted  by  the  heroic  story  of  Rama  and  his  faithful  consort  Sita, 
he  procured  their  images,  bedecked  them  with  flowers,  and  worshipped  them  in 
his  boyish  fashion.  But  disillusionment  came  when  he  heard  someone  denounce 
marriage  vehemently  as  a  terrible  bondage.  When  he  had  thought  this  over 
he  discarded  Rama  and  Sita  as  unworthy  of  worship.  In  their  place  he  installed 
the  image  of  Siva,  the  god  of  renunciation,  who  was  the  ideal  of  the  yogis. 
Nevertheless  he  retained  a  fondness  for  the  Ramayana. 

At  this  time  he  daily  experienced  a  strange  vision  when  he  was  about  to  fall 
asleep.  Closing  his  eyes,  he  would  see  between  his  eyebrows  a  ball  of  light  of 


Vivekananda 


3 

changing  colours,  which  would  slowly  expand  and  at  last  burst,  bathing  his 
whole  body  in  a  white  radiance.  Watching  this  light  he  would  gradually  fall 
asleep.  Since  it  was  a  daily  occurrence,  he  regarded  the  phenomenon  as  com¬ 
mon  to  all  people,  and  was  surprised  when  a  friend  denied  ever  having  seen 
such  a  thing.  Years  later,  however,  Narendra’s  spiritual  teacher,  Sri  Rama- 
krishna,  said  to  him,  “Naren,  my  boy,  do  you  see  a  light  when  you  go  to 
sleep?  Ramakrishna  knew  that  such  a  vision  indicated  a  great  spiritual  past 
and  an  inborn  habit  of  meditation.  The  vision  of  light  remained  with  Narendra 
until  the  end  of  his  life,  though  later  it  lost  its  regularity  and  intensity. 

While  still  a  child  Narendra  practised  meditation  with  a  friend  before  the 
image  of  Siva.  He  had  heard  that  the  holy  men  of  ancient  India  would  become 
so  absorbed  in  contemplation  of  God  that  their  hair  would  grow  and  gradually 
enter  into  the  earth,  like  the  roots  of  the  banyan  tree.  While  meditating, 
therefore,  he  would  open  his  eyes,  now  and  then,  to  see  if  his  own  hair  had 
entered  into  the  earth.  Even  so,  during  meditation,  he  often  became  uncon¬ 
scious  of  the  world.  On  one  occasion  he  saw  in  a  vision  a  luminous  person  of 
serene  countenance  who  was  carrying  the  staff  and  water-bowl  of  a  monk.  The 
apparition  was  about  to  say  something  when  Naren  became  frightened  and  left 
the  room.  He  thought  later  that  perhaps  this  had  been  a  vision  of  Buddha. 

At  the  age  of  six  he  was  sent  to  a  primary  school.  One  day,  however,  he 
repeated  at  home  some  of  the  vulgar  words  that  he  had  learnt  from  his  class¬ 
mates,  whereupon  his  disgusted  parents  took  him  out  of  the  school  and 
appointed  a  private  tutor,  who  conducted  classes  for  him  and  some  other 
children  of  the  neighbourhood  in  the  worship  hall  of  the  house.  Naren  soon 
showed  a  precocious  mind  and  developed  a  keen  memory.  Very  easily  he  learnt 
by  heart  the  whole  of  a  Sanskrit  grammar  and  long  passages  from  the  Ramayana 
and  the  Mahabharata.  Some  of  the  friendships  he  made  at  this  age  lasted  his 
whole  lifetime.  At  school  he  was  the  undisputed  leader.  When  playing  his 
favourite  game  of  “King  and  the  Court,”  he  would  assume  the  role  of  the  mon¬ 
arch  and  assign  to  his  friends  the  parts  of  the  ministers,  commander-in-chief,  and 
other  state  officials. 

He  was  marked  from  birth  to  be  a  leader  of  men,  as  his  name  Narendra 
(lord  of  men)  signified,  yet  even  at  that  early  age  he  could  not  tolerate  caste 
arrogance.  In  his  father's  office  separate  tobacco  pipes  were  provided  for  clients 
belonging  to  the  different  castes,  as  orthodox  Hindu  custom  required,  and  the 
pipe  from  which  the  Moslems  smoked  was  set  quite  apart.  Narendra  once  smoked 
tobacco  from  all  the  pipes,  including  the  one  marked  for  the  Moslems,  and 
when  reprimanded,  remarked,  “I  cannot  see  what  difference  it  makes.” 

During  these  early  years,  Narendra’s  future  personality  was  influenced  by  his 
gifted  father  and  his  saintly  mother,  both  of  whom  kept  a  chastening  eye  upon 
him.  The  father  had  his  own  manner  of  discipline.  For  example,  when,  in  the 
course  of  an  argument  with  his  mother,  the  impetuous  boy  once  uttered  a 
few  rude  words  and  the  report  came  to  the  father,  Viswanath  did  not  directly 
scold  his  son,  but  wrote  with  charcoal  on  the  door  of  his  room:  “Narendra 
today  said  to  his  mother — ”  and  added  the  words  that  had  been  used.  He 
wanted  Narendra's  friends  to  know  how  rudely  he  had  treated  his  mother. 


4  Vivekananda 

Another  time  Narendra  bluntly  asked  his  father,  “What  have  you  done  for 
me?” 

Instead  of  being  annoyed,  Viswanath  said,  “Go  and  look  at  yourself  in  the 
mirror,  and  then  you  will  know,” 

Still  another  day,  Narendra  said  to  his  father,  “IIow  shall  I  conduct  myself 
in  the  world?” 

“Never  show  surprise  at  anything,”  his  father  replied. 

This  priceless  advice  enabled  Narcndranath,  in  his  future  chequered  life,  to 
preserve  his  serenity  of  mind  whether  dwelling  with  princes  in  their  palaces  or 
sharing  the  straw  huts  of  beggars. 

The  mother,  Bhuvaneswari,  played  her  part  in  bringing  out  Narendranath's 
innate  virtues.  When  he  told  her,  one  day,  of  having  been  unjustly  treated  in 
school,  she  said  to  him,  in  consolation:  “My  child,  what  does  it  matter,  if  you 
are  in  the  right?  Always  follow  the  truth  without  caring  about  the  result.  Very 
often  you  may  have  to  suffer  injustice  or  unpleasant  consequences  for  holding 
to  the  truth;  but  you  must  not,  under  any  circumstances,  abandon  it.”  Many 
years  later  Narendranath  proudly  said  to  an  audience,  “I  am  indebted  to  my 
mother  for  whatever  knowledge  I  have  acquired.” 

One  day,  when  he  was  fighting  with  his  play-fellows,  Narendra  accidentally 
fell  from  the  porch  and  struck  his  forehead  against  a  stone.  The  wound  bled 
profusely  and  left  a  permanent  scar  over  his  right  eye.  Years  later,  when 
Ramakrishna  heard  of  this  accident,  he  remarked:  “In  a  way  it  was  a  good 
thing.  If  he  had  not  thus  lost  some  of  his  blood,  he  would  have  created  havoc 
in  the  world  with  his  excessive  energy.” 

In  1870,  at  the  age  of  seven,  Narendra  entered  high  school.  His  exceptional 
intelligence  was  soon  recognized  by  his  teachers  and  classmates.  Though  at 
first  reluctant  to  study  English  because  of  its  foreign  origin,  he  soon  took  it  up 
with  avidity.  But  the  curriculum  consumed  very  little  of  his  time.  He  used 
most  of  his  inexhaustible  energy  in  outside  activities.  Games  of  various  kinds, 
many  of  which  he  invented  or  improvised,  kept  him  occupied.  He  made  an 
imitation  gas-works  and  a  factory  for  aerating  water,  these  two  novelties  having 
just  been  introduced  in  Calcutta.  He  organized  an  amateur  theatrical  company 
and  a  gymnasium,  and  took  lessons  in  fencing,  wrestling,  rowing,  and  other 
manly  sports.  He  also  tried  his  hand  at  the  art  of  cooking.  Intensely  restless, 
he  would  soon  tire  of  one  pastime  and  seek  a  new  one.  With  his  friends  he 
visited  the  museums  and  the  zoological  garden.  He  arbitrated  the  disputes  of 
his  play-fellows  and  was  a  favourite  with  the  people  of  the  neighbourhood. 
Everybody  admired  his  courage,  straightforwardness,  and  simplicity. 

From  an  early  age  this  remarkable  youth  had  no  patience  with  fear  or 
superstition.  One  of  his  boyish  pranks  had  been  to  climb  a  flowering  tree 
belonging  to  a  neighbour,  pluck  the  flowers,  and  do  other  mischief.  The  owner 
of  the  tree,  finding  his  remonstrances  unheeded,  once  solemnly  told  Naren’s 
friends  that  the  tree  was  guarded  by  a  white-robed  ghost  who  would  certainly 
wring  their  necks  if  they  disturbed  his  peace.  The  boys  were  frightened  and 
kept  away.  But  Narendra  persuaded  them  to  follow  him  back,  and  he  climbed 
the  tree,  enjoying  his  usual  measure  of  fun,  and  broke  some  branches  by  way 


Vivekananda 


5 


of  further  mischief.  Turning  to  his  friends,  he  then  said:  “What  asses  you  all 
are!  See,  my  neck  is  still  there.  The  old  man's  story  is  simply  not  true.  Don’t 
believe  what  others  say  unless  you  yourselves  know  it  to  be  true.” 

These  simple  but  bold  words  were  an  indication  of  his  future  message  to  the 
world.  Addressing  large  audiences  in  later  years,  he  would  often  say:  “Do  not 
believe  in  a  thing  because  you  have  read  about  it  in  a  book.  Do  not  believe  in 
a  thing  because  another  man  has  said  it  was  true.  Do  not  believe  in  words 
because  they  are  hallowed  by  tradition.  Find  out  the  truth  for  yourself.  Reason 
it  out.  That  is  realization.” 

The  following  incident  illustrates  his  courage  and  presence  of  mind.  He  one 
day  wished  to  set  up  a  heavy  trapeze  in  the  gymnasium,  and  so  asked  the  help 
of  some  people  who  were  there.  Among  them  was  an  English  sailor.  The  trapeze 
fell  and  knocked  the  sailor  unconscious,  and  the  crowd,  thinking  him  dead, 
ran  away  for  fear  of  the  police.  But  Naren  tore  a  piece  from  his  cloth,  bandaged 
the  sailor’s  wound,  washed  his  face  with  water,  and  gradually  revived  him. 
Then  he  moved  the  wounded  man  to  a  neighbouring  schoolhouse  where  he 
nursed  him  for  a  week.  When  the  sailor  had  recovered,  Naren  sent  him  away 
with  a  little  purse  collected  from  his  friends. 

All  through  this  period  of  boyish  play  Narendra  retained  his  admiration  for 
the  life  of  the  wandering  monk.  Pointing  to  a  certain  line  on  the  palm  of  his 
hand,  he  would  say  to  his  friends:  “I  shall  certainly  become  a  sannyasin.  A 
palmist  has  predicted  it.” 

ON  THE  THRESHOLD  OF  YOUTH 

As  Narendra  grew  into  adolescence,  his  temperament  showed  a  marked 
change.  He  became  keen  about  intellectual  matters,  read  serious  books  on 
history  and  literature,  devoured  newspapers,  and  attended  public  meetings. 
Music  was  his  favourite  pastime.  He  insisted  that  it  should  express  a  lofty  idea 
and  arouse  the  feelings  of  the  musician. 

At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  experienced  his  first  spiritual  ecstasy.  The  family  was 
journeying  to  Raipur  in  the  Central  Provinces,  and  part  of  the  trip  had  to  be 
made  in  a  bullock  cart.  On  that  particular  day  the  air  was  crisp  and  clear;  the 
trees  and  creepers  were  covered  with  green  leaves  and  many-coloured  blossoms; 
birds  of  brilliant  plumage  warbled  in  the  woods.  The  cart  was  moving  along 
a  narrow  pass  where  the  lofty  peaks  rising  on  the  two  sides  almost  touched 
each  other.  Narendra’s  eyes  spied  a  large  bee-hive  in  the  cleft  of  a  giant  cliff, 
and  suddenly  his  mind  was  filled  with  awe  and  reverence  for  the  Divine 
Providence.  He  lost  outer  consciousness  and  lay  thus  in  the  cart  for  a  long 
time.  Even  after  returning  to  the  sense-perceived  world  he  radiated  joy. 

Another  interesting  mental  phenomenon  may  be  mentioned  here;  for  it  was 
one  often  experienced  by  Narendranath.  From  boyhood,  on  first  beholding 
certain  people  or  places,  he  would  feel  that  he  had  known  them  before;  but 
how  long  before  he  could  never  remember.  One  day  he  and  some  of  his  com¬ 
panions  were  in  a  room  in  a  friend’s  house,  where  they  were  discussing  various 
topics.  Something  was  mentioned,  and  Narendra  felt  at  once  that  he  had  on  a 
previous  occasion  talked  about  the  same  subject  with  the  selfsame  friends  in 


6 


Vivekananda 


that  very  house.  He  even  correctly  described  every  nook  and  corner  of  the 
building,  which  he  had  not  seen  before.  He  tried  at  first  to  explain  this  singular 
phenomenon  by  the  doctrine  of  reincarnation,  thinking  that  perhaps  he  had 
lived  in  that  house  in  a  previous  life.  But  he  dismissed  the  idea  as  improbable. 
Later  he  concluded  that  before  his  birth  he  must  have  had  previsions  of  the 
people,  places,  and  events  that  he  was  to  experience  in  his  present  incarnation; 
that  was  why,  he  thought,  he  could  recognize  them  as  soon  as  they  presented 
themselves  to  him. 

At  Raipur  Narendra  was  encouraged  by  his  father  to  meet  notable  scholars 
and  discuss  with  them  various  intellectual  topics  usually  considered  too  abstruse 
for  boys  of  his  age.  On  such  occasions  he  exhibited  great  mental  power.  From 
his  father,  Narendra  had  learnt  the  art  of  grasping  the  essentials  of  things, 
seeing  truth  from  the  widest  and  most  comprehensive  standpoints,  and  holding 
to  the  real  issue  under  discussion. 

In  1879  the  family  returned  to  Calcutta,  and  Narendra  within  a  short  time 
graduated  from  high  school  in  the  first  division.  In  the  meantime  he  had  read 
a  great  many  standard  books  of  English  and  Bengali  literature.  History  was  his 
favourite  subject.  He  also  acquired  at  this  time  an  unusual  method  of  reading 
a  book  and  acquiring  the  knowledge  of  its  subject  matter.  To  quote  his  own 
words:  “I  could  understand  an  author  without  reading  every  line  of  his  book. 
I  would  read  the  first  and  last  lines  of  a  paragraph  and  grasp  its  meaning.  Later 
I  found  that  I  could  understand  the  subject  matter  by  reading  only  the  first 
and  last  lines  of  a  page.  Afterwards  I  could  follow  the  whole  trend  of  a  writer’s 
argument  by  merely  reading  a  few  lines,  though  the  author  himself  tried  to 
explain  the  subject  in  five  or  more  pages.” 

COLLEGE  DAYS 

Soon  the  excitement  of  his  boyhood  days  was  over,  and  in  1879  Narendranath 
entered  the  Presidency  College  of  Calcutta  for  higher  studies.  After  a  year  he 
joined  the  General  Assembly’s  Institution,  founded  by  the  Scottish  General 
Missionary  Board  and  later  known  as  the  Scottish  Church  College.  It  was  from 
Hastie,  the  principal  of  the  college  and  the  professor  of  English  literature,  that 
he  first  heard  the  name  Sri  Ramakrishna. 

In  college  Narendra,  now  a  handsome  youth,  muscular  and  agile,  though 
slightly  inclined  to  stoutness,  enjoyed  serious  studies.  During  the  first  two 
years  he  studied  Western  logic.  Thereafter  he  specialized  in  Western  philosophy 
and  the  ancient  and  modern  history  of  the  different  European  nations.  His 
memory  was  prodigious.  It  took  him  only  three  days  to  assimilate  Green’s 
History  of  the  English  People .  Often,  on  the  eve  of  an  examination,  he  would 
read  the  whole  night,  keeping  awake  by  drinking  strong  tea  or  coffee. 

About  this  time  he  came  in  contact  with  Sri  Ramakrishna;  this  event,  as  we 
shall  presently  see,  was  to  become  the  major  turning-point  of  his  life.  As  a 
result  of  his  association  with  Sri  Ramakrishna,  his  innate  spiritual  yearning  was 
stirred  up,  and  he  began  to  feel  the  transitoriness  of  the  world  and  the  futility 
of  academic  education.  The  day  before  his  B.A.  examination,  he  suddenly  felt 
an  all-consuming  love  for  God  and,  standing  before  the  room  of  a  college-mate, 
was  heard  to  sing  with  great  feeling: 


Vivekananda 


7 


Sing  ye,  O  mountains,  O  clouds,  O  great  winds! 

Sing  ye,  sing  ye,  sing  His  glory! 

Sing  with  joy,  all  ye  suns  and  moons  and  stars! 

Sing  ye,  sing  ye,  His  glory! 

The  friend,  surprised,  reminded  him  of  the  next  day’s  examination,  but 
Narendra  was  unconcerned;  the  shadow  of  the  approaching  monastic  life  was 
fast  falling  on  him.  He  appeared  for  the  examination,  however,  and  easily  passed. 

About  Narendra’s  scholarship,  Professor  Hastie  once  remarked:  “Narendra  is 
a  real  genius.  I  have  travelled  far  and  wide,  but  have  not  yet  come  across  a  lad 
of  his  talents  and  possibilities  even  among  the  philosophical  students  in  the 
German  universities.  He  is  bound  to  make  his  mark  in  life.” 

Narendra’s  many-sided  genius  found  its  expression  in  music,  as  well.  He 
studied  both  instrumental  and  vocal  music  under  expert  teachers.  He  could  play 
on  many  instruments,  but  excelled  in  singing.  From  a  Moslem  teacher  he  learnt 
Hindi,  Urdu,  and  Persian  songs,  most  of  them  of  devotional  nature. 

He  also  became  associated  with  the  Brahmo  Samaj,  an  important  religious 
movement  of  the  time,  which  influenced  him  during  this  formative  period  of 
his  life. 


THE  BRAHMO  SAMAJ 

The  introduction  of  English  education  in  India  following  the  British  con¬ 
quest  of  the  country  brought  Hindu  society  in  contact  with  the  intellectual 
and  aggressive  European  culture.  The  Hindu  youths  who  came  under  the  spell 
of  the  new,  dynamic  way  of  life  realized  the  many  shortcomings  of  their  own 
society.  Under  the  Moslem  rule,  even  before  the  coming  of  the  British,  the 
dynamic  aspect  of  the  Hindu  culture  had  been  suppressed  and  the  caste-system 
stratified.  The  priests  controlled  the  religious  life  of  the  people  for  their  own 
selfish  interest.  Meaningless  dogmas  and  lifeless  ceremonies  supplanted  the 
invigorating  philosophical  teachings  of  the  Upanishads  and  the  Bhagavad  Gita. 
The  masses  were  exploited,  moreover,  by  the  landlords,  and  the  lot  of  women 
was  especially  pitiable.  Following  the  breakdown  of  the  Moslem  rule,  chaos 
reigned  in  every  field  of  Indian  life,  social,  political,  religious,  and  economic. 
The  newly  introduced  English  education  brought  into  sharp  focus  the  many 
drawbacks  of  society,  and  various  reform  movements,  both  liberal  and  orthodox, 
were  initiated  to  make  the  national  life  flow  once  more  through  healthy 
channels. 

The  Brahmo  Samaj,  one  of  these  liberal  movements,  captured  the  imagina¬ 
tion  of  the  educated  youths  of  Bengal.  Raja  Rammohan  Roy  (1774-1833),  the 
founder  of  this  religious  organization,  broke  away  from  the  rituals,  image 
worship,  and  priestcraft  of  orthodox  Hinduism  and  exhorted  his  followers  to 
dedicate  themselves  to  the  “worship  and  adoration  of  the  Eternal,  the  Unsearch¬ 
able,  the  Immutable  Being,  who  is  the  Author  and  the  Preserver  of  the  uni¬ 
verse.”  The  Raja,  endowed  with  a  gigantic  intellect,  studied  the  Hindu,  Moslem, 
Christian,  and  Buddhist  scriptures  and  was  the  first  Indian  to  realize  the 
importance  of  the  Western  rational  method  for  solving  the  diverse  problems 
of  Hindu  society.  He  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  introduction  of  English 
education  in  India,  which,  though  it  at  first  produced  a  deleterious  effect  on 


8  Vivekananda 

the  newly  awakened  Hindu  consciousness,  ultimately  revealed  to  a  few  Indians 
the  glorious  heritage  of  their  own  indigenous  civilization. 

Among  the  prominent  leaders  of  the  Brahmo  Samaj  who  succeeded  Ram- 
mohan  Roy  were  Dcvcndranath  Tagore  (1817-1905),  a  great  devotee  of  the 
Upanishads,  and  Kcshab  Chandra  Sen  (1838-1884),  who  was  inclined  to  the 
rituals  and  doctrines  of  Christianity.  The  Brahmo  Samaj,  under  their  leadership, 
discarded  many  of  the  conventions  of  Hinduism,  such  as  rituals  and  the  worship 
of  God  through  images.  Primarily  a  reformist  movement,  it  directed  its  main 
energy  to  the  emancipation  of  women,  the  remarriage  of  Hindu  widows,  the 
abolition  of  early  marriage,  and  the  spread  of  mass  education.  Influenced  by 
Western  culture,  the  Brahmo  Samaj  upheld  the  supremacy  of  reason,  preached 
against  the  uncritical  acceptance  of  scriptural  authority,  and  strongly  supported 
the  slogans  of  the  French  Revolution.  The  whole  movement  was  intellectual 
and  eclectic  in  character,  born  of  the  necessity  of  the  times;  unlike  traditional 
Hinduism,  it  had  no  root  in  the  spiritual  experiences  of  saints  and  seers. 
Narendra,  like  many  other  contemporary  young  men,  felt  the  appeal  of  its 
progressive  ideas  and  became  one  of  its  members.  But,  as  will  be  presently  seen, 
the  Brahmo  Samaj  could  not  satisfy  the  deep  spiritual  yearning  of  his  soul. 

About  this  time  Narendra  was  urged  by  his  father  to  marry,  and  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  soon  presented  itself.  A  wealthy  man,  whose  daughter  Narendra  was 
asked  to  accept  as  his  bride,  offered  to  defray  his  expenses  for  higher  studies 
in  England  so  that  he  might  qualify  himself  for  the  much  coveted  Indian  Civil 
Service.  Narendra  refused.  Other  proposals  of  similar  nature  produced  no  dif¬ 
ferent  result.  Apparently  it  was  not  his  destiny  to  lead  a  householder’s  life. 

From  boyhood  Narendra  had  shown  a  passion  for  purity.  Whenever  his  warm 
and  youthful  nature  tempted  him  to  walk  into  a  questionable  adventure,  he 
was  held  back  by  an  unseen  hand.  His  mother  had  taught  him  the  value  of 
chastity  and  had  made  him  observe  it  as  a  matter  of  honour,  in  loyalty  to 
herself  and  the  family  tradition.  But  purity  to  Narendra  was  not  a  negative 
virtue,  a  mere  abstention  from  carnal  pleasures.  To  be  pure,  he  felt,  was  to 
conserve  an  intense  spiritual  force  that  would  later  manifest  itself  in  all  the 
noble  aspirations  of  life.  He  regarded  himself  as  a  brahmacharin,  a  celibate 
student  of  the  Hindu  tradition,  who  worked  hard,  prized  ascetic  disciplines, 
held  holy  things  in  reverence,  and  enjoyed  clean  words,  thoughts,  and  acts. 
For  according  to  the  Hindu  scriptures,  a  man,  by  means  of  purity,  which  is 
the  greatest  of  all  virtues,  can  experience  the  subtlest  spiritual  perceptions.  In 
Naren  it  accounts  for  the  great  power  of  concentration,  memory,  and  insight, 
and  for  his  indomitable  mental  energy  and  physical  stamina. 

In  his  youth  Narendra  used  to  see  every  night  two  visions,  utterly  dissimilar 
in  nature,  before  falling  asleep.  One  was  that  of  a  worldly  man  with  an  accom¬ 
plished  wife  and  children,  enjoying  wealth,  luxuries,  fame,  and  social  position; 
the  other,  that  of  a  sannyasin,  a  wandering  monk,  bereft  of  earthly  security  and 
devoted  to  the  contemplation  of  God.  Narendra  felt  that  he  had  the  power  to 
realize  either  of  these  ideals;  but  when  his  mind  reflected  on  their  respective 
virtues,  he  was  inevitably  drawn  to  the  life  of  renunciation.  The  glamour  of  the 
world  would  fade  and  disappear.  His  deeper  self  instinctively  chose  the  austere 
path. 


Vivekananda 


9 


For  a  time  the  congregational  prayers  and  the  devotional  songs  of  the  Brahmo 
Samaj  exhilarated  Narendra’s  mind,  but  soon  he  found  that  they  did  not  give 
him  any  real  spiritual  experience.  He  wanted  to  realize  God,  the  goal  of  religion, 
and  so  felt  the  imperative  need  of  being  instructed  by  a  man  who  had  seen  God. 

In  his  eagerness  he  went  to  Devendranath,  the  venerable  leader  of  the  Brahmo 
Samaj,  and  bluntly  asked  him,  “Sir,  have  you  seen  God?” 

Devendranath  was  embarrassed  and  replied:  “My  boy,  you  have  the  eyes  of 
a  yogi.  You  should  practise  meditation.” 

The  youth  was  disappointed  and  felt  that  this  teacher  was  not  the  man  to 
help  him  in  his  spiritual  struggle.  But  he  received  no  better  answer  from  the 
leaders  of  other  religious  sects.  Then  he  remembered  having  heard  the  name 
of  Ramakrishna  Paramahamsa  from  Professor  Hastie,  who,  while  lecturing  his 
class  on  Wordsworth’s  poem  The  Excursion ,  had  spoken  of  trances,  remarking 
that  such  religious  ecstasies  were  the  result  of  purity  and  concentration.  He  had 
said,  further,  that  an  exalted  experience  of  this  kind  was  a  rare  phenomenon, 
especially  in  modern  times.  “I  have  known,”  he  had  said,  “only  one  person  who 
has  realized  that  blessed  state,  and  he  is  Ramakrishna  of  Dakshineswar.  You 
will  understand  trances  if  you  visit  the  saint.” 

Narendra  had  also  heard  about  Sri  Ramakrishna  from  a  relative,  Ramchandra 
Datta,  who  was  one  of  the  foremost  householder  disciples  of  the  Master. 
Learning  of  Narendra’s  unwillingness  to  marry  and  ascribing  it  to  his  desire  to 
lead  a  spiritual  life,  Ramchandra  had  said  to  him,  “If  you  really  want  to  culti¬ 
vate  spirituality,  then  visit  Ramakrishna  at  Dakshineswar.” 

Narendra  met  Ramakrishna  for  the  first  time  in  November  1881  at  the  house 
of  the  Master’s  devotee  Surendranath  Mitra,  the  young  man  having  been  invited 
there  to  entertain  the  visitors  with  his  melodious  music.  The  Paramahamsa  was 
much  impressed  by  his  sincerity  and  devotion,  and  after  a  few  inquiries  asked 
him  to  visit  him  at  Dakshineswar.  Narendra  accepted.  He  wished  to  learn  if 
Ramakrishna  was  the  man  to  help  him  in  his  spiritual  quest. 

RAMAKRISHNA 

Ramakrishna,  the  God-man  of  modern  times,  was  born  on  February  18,  1836, 
in  the  little  village  of  Kamarpukur,  in  the  district  of  Hooghly  in  Bengal.  How 
different  were  his  upbringing  and  the  environment  of  his  boyhood  from  those 
of  Narendranath,  who  was  to  become,  later,  the  bearer  and  interpreter  of  his 
message!  Ramakrishna’s  parents,  belonging  to  the  brahmin  caste,  were  poor, 
pious,  and  devoted  to  the  traditions  of  their  ancient  religion.  Full  of  fun  and 
innocent  joys,  the  fair  child,  with  flowing  hair  and  a  sweet,  musical  voice, 
grew  up  in  a  simple  countryside  of  rice-fields,  cows,  and  banyan  and  mango 
trees.  He  was  apathetic  about  his  studies  and  remained  practically  illiterate  all 
his  life,  but  his  innate  spiritual  tendencies  found  expression  through  devotional 
songs  and  the  company  of  wandering  monks,  who  fired  his  boyish  imagination 
by  the  stories  of  their  spiritual  adventures.  At  the  age  of  six  he  experienced  a 
spiritual  ecstasy  while  watching  a  flight  of  snow-white  cranes  against  a  black 
sky  overcast  with  rain-clouds.  He  began  to  go  into  trances  as  he  meditated  on 
gods  and  goddesses.  His  father’s  death,  which  left  the  family  in  straitened 
circumstances,  deepened  his  spiritual  mood.  And  so,  though  at  the  age  of 


10 


Vivekananda 


sixteen  he  joined  his  brother  in  Calcutta,  he  refused  to  go  on  there  with  his 
studies;  for,  as  he  remarked,  he  was  simply  not  interested  in  an  education  whose 
sole  purpose  was  to  earn  mere  bread  and  butter.  He  felt  a  deep  longing  for  the 
realization  of  God. 

The  floodgate  of  Ramakrishna’s  emotion  burst  all  bounds  when  he  took  up 
the  duties  of  a  priest  in  the  Kali  temple  of  Dakshineswar,  where  the  Deity  was 
worshipped  as  the  Divine  Mother.  Ignorant  of  the  scriptures  and  of  the  intri¬ 
cacies  of  ritual,  Ramakrishna  poured  his  whole  soul  into  prayer,  which  often 
took  the  form  of  devotional  songs.  Food,  sleep,  and  other  physical  needs  were 
completely  forgotten  in  an  all-consuming  passion  for  the  vision  of  God.  His 
nights  were  spent  in  contemplation  in  the  neighbouring  woods.  Doubt  some¬ 
times  alternated  with  hope;  but  an  inner  certainty  and  the  testimony  of  the 
illumined  saints  sustained  him  in  his  darkest  hours  of  despair.  Formal  worship 
or  the  mere  sight  of  the  image  did  not  satisfy  his  inquiring  mind;  for  he  felt 
that  a  figure  of  stone  could  not  be  the  bestower  of  peace  and  immortality. 
Behind  the  image  there  must  be  the  real  Spirit,  which  he  was  determined  to 
behold.  This  was  not  an  easy  task.  For  a  long  time  the  Spirit  played  with  him 
a  teasing  game  of  hide-and-seek,  but  at  last  It  yielded  to  the  demand  of  love 
on  the  part  of  the  young  devotee.  When  he  felt  the  direct  presence  of  the 
Divine  Mother,  Ramakrishna  dropped  unconscious  to  the  floor,  experiencing 
within  himself  a  constant  flow  of  bliss. 

This  foretaste  of  what  was  to  follow  made  him  God-intoxicated,  and 
whetted  his  appetite  for  further  experience.  He  wished  to  see  God  uninter¬ 
ruptedly,  with  eyes  open  as  well  as  closed.  He  therefore  abandoned  himself 
recklessly  to  the  practice  of  various  extreme  spiritual  disciplines.  To  remove 
from  his  mind  the  least  trace  of  the  arrogance  of  his  high  brahmin  caste,  he 
used  to  clean  the  dirty  places  at  a  pariah’s  house.  Through  a  stern  process  of 
discrimination  he  effaced  all  sense  of  distinction  between  gold  and  clay.  Purity 
became  the  very  breath  of  his  nostrils,  and  he  could  not  regard  a  woman,  even 
in  a  dream,  in  any  other  way  except  as  his  own  mother  or  the  Mother  of  the 
universe.  For  several  years  his  eyelids  did  not  touch  each  other  in  sleep.  And 
he  was  finally  thought  to  be  insane. 

Indeed,  the  stress  of  his  spiritual  practice  soon  told  upon  Ramakrishna’s 
delicate  body  and  he  returned  to  Kamarpukur  to  recover  his  health.  His  relatives 
and  old  friends  saw  a  marked  change  in  his  nature;  for  the  gay  boy  had  been 
transformed  into  a  contemplative  young  man  whose  vision  was  directed  to 
something  on  a  distant  horizon.  His  mother  proposed  marriage,  and  finding  in 
this  the  will  of  the  Divine  Mother,  Ramakrishna  consented.  He  even  indicated 
where  the  girl  was  to  be  found,  namely,  in  the  village  of  Jayrambati,  only 
three  miles  away.  Here  lived  the  little  Saradamani,  a  girl  of  five,  who  was  in 
many  respects  very  different  from  the  other  girls  of  her  age.  The  child  would 
pray  to  God  to  make  her  character  as  fragrant  as  the  tuberose  and  purer  than 
the  full  moon,  which,  pure  as  it  was,  showed  a  few  dark  spots.  The  marriage 
was  celebrated  and  Ramakrishna,  participating,  regarded  the  whole  affair  as 
fun  or  a  new  excitement. 

In  a  short  while  he  came  back  to  Dakshineswar  and  plunged  again  into  the 
stormy  life  of  religious  experimentation.  His  mother,  his  newly  married  wife, 


Vivekananda 


11 


and  his  relatives  were  forgotten.  Now,  however,  his  spiritual  disciplines  took  a 
new  course.  He  wanted  to  follow  the  time-honoured  paths  of  the  Hindu  religion 
under  the  guidance  of  competent  teachers,  and  they  came  to  him  one  by  one, 
nobody  knew  from  where.  One  was  a  woman,  under  whom  he  practised  the 
disciplines  of  Tantra  and  of  the  Vaishnava  faith  and  achieved  the  highest  result 
in  an  incredibly  short  time.  It  was  she  who  diagnosed  his  physical  malady  as 
the  manifestation  of  deep  spiritual  emotions  and  described  his  apparent  insanity 
as  the  result  of  an  agonizing  love  for  God;  he  was  immediately  relieved.  It  was 
she,  moreover,  who  first  declared  him  to  be  an  Incarnation  of  God,  and  she 
proved  her  statement  before  an  assembly  of  theologians  by  scriptural  evidence. 
Under  another  teacher,  the  monk  Jatadhari,  Ramakrishna  delved  into  the  mys¬ 
teries  of  Rama  worship  and  experienced  Rama's  visible  presence.  Further,  he 
communed  with  God  through  the  divine  relationships  of  Father,  Mother, 
Friend,  and  Beloved.  By  an  austere  sannyasin  named  Totapuri,  he  was  initiated 
into  the  monastic  life,  and  in  three  days  he  realized  his  complete  oneness  with 
Brahman,  the  undifferentiated  Absolute,  which  is  the  culmination  of  man’s 
spiritual  endeavour.  Totapuri  himself  had  had  to  struggle  for  forty  years  to 
realize  this  identity. 

Ramakrishna  turned  next  to  Christianity  and  Islam,  to  practise  their  respec¬ 
tive  disciplines,  and  he  attained  the  same  result  that  he  had  attained  through 
Hinduism.  He  was  thereby  convinced  that  these,  too,  were  ways  to  the  realiza¬ 
tion  of  God-consciousness.  Finally,  he  worshipped  his  own  wife — who  in  the 
meantime  had  grown  into  a  young  woman  of  seventeen — as  the  manifestation 
of  the  Divine  Mother  of  the  universe  and  surrendered  at  her  feet  the  fruit  of 
his  past  spiritual  practices.  After  this  he  left  behind  all  his  disciplines  and  strug¬ 
gles.  For  according  to  Hindu  tradition,  when  the  normal  relationship  between 
husband  and  wife,  which  is  the  strongest  foundation  of  the  worldly  life,  has 
been  transcended  and  a  man  sees  in  his  wife  the  divine  presence,  he  then  sees 
God  everywhere  in  the  universe.  This  is  the  culmination  of  the  spiritual  life. 

Ramakrishna  himself  was  now  convinced  of  his  divine  mission  on  earth  and 
came  to  know  that  through  him  the  Divine  Mother  would  found  a  new  reli¬ 
gious  order  comprising  those  who  would  accept  the  doctrine  of  the  Universal 
Religion  which  he  had  experienced.  It  was  further  revealed  to  him  that  anyone 
who  had  prayed  to  God  sincerely,  even  once,  as  well  as  those  who  were  passing 
through  their  final  birth  on  earth,  would  accept  him  as  their  spiritual  ideal 
and  mould  their  lives  according  to  his  universal  teaching. 

The  people  around  him  were  bewildered  to  see  this  transformation  of  a  man 
whom  they  had  ridiculed  only  a  short  while  ago  as  insane.  The  young  priest 
had  become  God’s  devotee;  the  devotee,  an  ascetic;  the  ascetic,  a  saint;  the 
saint,  a  man  of  realization;  and  the  man  of  realization,  a  new  Prophet.  Like  the 
full-blown  blossom  attracting  bees,  Ramakrishna  drew  to  him  men  and  women 
of  differing  faith,  intelligence,  and  social  position.  He  gave  generously  to  all 
from  the  inexhaustible  storehouse  of  divine  wisdom,  and  everyone  felt  uplifted 
in  his  presence.  But  the  Master  himself  was  not  completely  satisfied.  He  longed 
for  young  souls  yet  untouched  by  the  world,  who  would  renounce  everything 
for  the  realization  of  God  and  the  service  of  humanity.  He  was  literally  con¬ 
sumed  with  this  longing.  The  talk  of  worldly  people  was  tasteless  to  him.  He 


12 


Vivekananda 


often  compared  such  people  to  a  mixture  of  milk  and  water  with  the  latter  pre¬ 
ponderating,  and  said  that  he  had  become  weary  of  trying  to  prepare  thick 
milk  from  that  mixture.  Evenings,  when  his  anguish  reached  its  limit,  he  would 
climb  the  roof  of  a  building  near  the  temple  and  cry  at  the  top  of  his  voice: 
“Come,  my  boys!  Oh,  where  are  you  all?  I  cannot  bear  to  live  without  you!”  A 
mother  could  not  feel  more  intensely  for  her  beloved  children,  a  friend  for  his 
dearest  friend,  or  a  lover  for  her  sweetheart. 

Shortly  thereafter  the  young  men  destined  to  be  his  monastic  disciples  began 
to  arrive.  And  foremost  among  them  was  Narendranath. 

RAMAKRISHNA  AND  NARENDRANATH 

The  first  meeting  at  Dakshineswar  between  the  Master  and  Narendra  was 
momentous.  Sri  Ramakrishna  recognized  instantaneously  his  future  messenger. 
Narendra,  careless  about  his  clothes  and  general  appearance,  was  so  unlike  the 
other  young  men  who  had  accompanied  him  to  the  temple.  His  eyes  were 
impressive,  partly  indrawn,  indicating  a  meditative  mood.  He  sang  a  few  songs, 
and  as  usual  poured  into  them  his  whole  soul. 

His  first  song  was  this: 

Let  us  go  back  once  more,  O  mind,  to  our  proper  home! 

Here  in  this  foreign  land  of  earth 

Why  should  we  wander  aimlessly  in  stranger’s  guise? 

These  living  beings  round  about, 

And  the  five  elements, 

Are  strangers  to  you,  all  of  them;  none  are  your  own. 

Why  do  you  so  forget  yourself, 

In  love  with  strangers,  foolish  mind? 

Why  do  you  so  forget  your  own? 

Mount  the  path  of  truth,  O  mind!  Unflaggingly  climb, 

With  love  as  the  lamp  to  light  your  way. 

As  your  provision  on  the  journey,  take  with  you 
The  virtues,  hidden  carefully; 

For,  like  two  highwaymen, 

Greed  and  delusion  wait  to  rob  you  of  your  wealth. 

And  keep  beside  you  constantly, 

As  guards  to  shelter  you  from  harm, 

Calmness  of  mind  and  self-control. 

Companionship  with  holy  men  will  be  for  you 
A  welcome  rest-house  by  the  road; 

There  rest  your  weary  limbs  awhile,  asking  your  way, 

If  ever  you  should  be  in  doubt, 

Of  him  who  watches  there. 

If  anything  along  the  path  should  cause  you  fear, 

Then  loudly  shout  the  name  of  God; 

For  He  is  ruler  of  that  road, 

And  even  Death  must  bow  to  Him. 

When  the  singing  was  over,  Sri  Ramakrishna  suddenly  grasped  Narendra’s 
hand  and  took  him  into  the  northern  porch.  To  Narendra’s  utter  amazement, 


Vivckananda 


13 


the  Master  said  with  tears  streaming  down  his  cheeks:  “Ah!  You  have  come 
so  late.  How  unkind  of  you  to  keep  me  waiting  so  long!  My  ears  are  almost 
seared  listening  to  the  cheap  talk  of  worldly  people.  Oh,  how  I  have  been  yearn¬ 
ing  to  unburden  my  mind  to  one  who  will  understand  my  thought!"  Then 
with  folded  hands  he  said:  “Lord!  I  know  you  are  the  ancient  sage  Nara — the 
Incarnation  of  Narayana — bom  on  earth  to  remove  the  miseries  of  mankind.” 
The  rationalist  Naren  regarded  these  words  as  the  meaningless  jargon  of  an 
insane  person.  He  was  further  dismayed  when  Sri  Ramakrishna  presently 
brought  from  his  room  some  sweets  and  fed  him  with  his  own  hands.  But  the 
Master  nevertheless  extracted  from  him  a  promise  to  visit  Dakshineswar  again. 

They  returned  to  the  room  and  Naren  asked  the  Master,  “Sir,  have  you  seen 
God?”  Without  a  moment's  hesitation  the  reply  was  given:  “Yes,  I  have  seen 
God.  I  see  Him  as  I  see  you  here,  only  more  clearly.  God  can  be  seen.  One 
can  talk  to  Him.  But  who  cares  for  God?  People  shed  torrents  of  tears  for  their 
wives,  children,  wealth,  and  property,  but  who  weeps  for  the  vision  of  God? 
If  one  cries  sincerely  for  God,  one  can  surely  see  Him.” 

Narendra  was  astounded.  For  the  first  time,  he  was  face  to  face  with  a 
man  who  asserted  that  he  had  seen  God.  For  the  first  time,  in  fact,  he  was 
hearing  that  God  could  be  seen.  He  could  feel  that  Ramakrishna’s  words  were 
uttered  from  the  depths  of  an  inner  experience.  They  could  not  be  doubted. 
Still  he  could  not  reconcile  these  words  with  Ramakrishna’s  strange  conduct, 
which  he  had  witnessed  only  a  few  minutes  before.  What  puzzled  Narendra 
further  was  Ramakrishna's  normal  behaviour  in  the  presence  of  others.  The 
young  man  returned  to  Calcutta  bewildered,  but  yet  with  a  feeling  of  inner 
peace. 

During  his  second  visit  to  the  Master,  Narendra  had  an  even  stranger  experi¬ 
ence.  After  a  minute  or  two  Sri  Ramakrishna  drew  near  him  in  an  ecstatic  mood, 
muttered  some  words,  fixed  his  eyes  on  him,  and  placed  his  right  foot  on  Naren’s 
body.  At  this  touch  Naren  saw,  with  eyes  open,  the  walls,  the  room,  the  temple 
garden — nay,  the  whole  world — vanishing,  and  even  himself  disappearing  into  a 
void.  He  felt  sure  that  he  was  facing  death.  He  cried  in  consternation:  “What 
are  you  doing  to  me?  I  have  my  parents,  brothers,  and  sisters  at  home.” 

The  Master  laughed  and  stroked  Naren's  chest,  restoring  him  to  his  normal 
mood.  He  said,  “All  right,  everything  will  happen  in  due  time.” 

Narendra,  completely  puzzled,  felt  that  Ramakrishna  had  cast  a  hypnotic 
spell  upon  him.  But  how  could  that  have  been?  Did  he  not  pride  himself 
in  the  possession  of  an  iron  will?  He  felt  disgusted  that  he  should  have  been 
unable  to  resist  the  influence  of  a  madman.  Nonetheless  he  felt  a  great  inner 
attraction  for  Sri  Ramakrishna. 

On  his  third  visit  Naren  fared  no  better,  though  he  tried  his  utmost  to  be 
on  guard.  Sri  Ramakrishna  took  him  to  a  neighbouring  garden  and,  in  a  state 
of  trance,  touched  him.  Completely  overwhelmed,  Naren  lost  consciousness. 

Sri  Ramakrishna,  referring  later  to  this  incident,  said  that  after  putting  Naren 
into  a  state  of  unconsciousness,  he  had  asked  him  many  questions  about  his 
past,  his  mission  in  the  world,  and  the  duration  of  his  present  life.  The  answers 
had  only  confirmed  what  he  himself  had  thought  about  these  matters.  Rama¬ 
krishna  told  his  other  disciples  that  Naren  had  attained  perfection  even  before 


14 


Vivekananda 


this  birth;  that  he  was  an  adept  in  meditation;  and  that  the  day  Naren  recog¬ 
nized  his  true  self,  he  would  give  up  the  body  by  an  act  of  will,  through  yoga. 
Often  he  was  heard  to  say  that  Naren  was  a  Saptarshi,  one  of  the  Seven  Sages, 
who  live  in  the  realm  of  the  Absolute.  He  narrated  to  them  a  vision  he  had  had 
regarding  the  disciple’s  spiritual  heritage. 

Absorbed,  one  day,  in  samadhi,  Ramakrishna  had  found  that  his  mind  was 
soaring  high,  going  beyond  the  physical  universe  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars, 
and  passing  into  the  subtle  region  of  ideas.  As  it  continued  to  ascend,  the  forms 
of  gods  and  goddesses  were  left  behind,  and  it  crossed  the  luminous  barrier 
separating  the  phenomenal  universe  from  the  Absolute,  entering  finally  the 
transcendental  realm.  There  Ramakrishna  saw  seven  venerable  sages  absorbed 
in  meditation.  These,  he  thought,  must  have  surpassed  even  the  gods  and 
goddesses  in  wisdom  and  holiness,  and  as  he  was  admiring  their  unique  spiritual¬ 
ity  he  saw  a  portion  of  the  undifferentiated  Absolute  become  congealed,  as  it 
were,  and  take  the  form  of  a  Divine  Child.  Clambering  upon  the  lap  of  one 
of  the  sages  and  gently  clasping  his  neck  with  His  soft  arms,  the  Child  whispered 
something  in  his  ear,  and  at  this  magic  touch  the  sage  awoke  from  meditation. 
He  fixed  his  half-open  eyes  upon  the  wondrous  Child,  who  said  in  great  joy: 
‘4  am  going  down  to  earth.  Won’t  you  come  with  me?”  With  a  benign  look 
the  sage  expressed  assent  and  returned  into  deep  spiritual  ecstasy.  Ramakrishna 
was  amazed  to  observe  that  a  tiny  portion  of  the  sage,  however,  descended  to 
earth,  taking  the  form  of  light,  which  struck  the  house  in  Calcutta  where 
Narendra’s  family  lived,  and  when  he  saw  Narendra  for  the  first  time,  he  at 
once  recognized  him  as  the  incarnation  of  the  sage.  He  also  admitted  that 
the  Divine  Child  who  brought  about  the  descent  of  the  rishi  was  none  other 
than  himself. 


THE  MASTER  AND  THE  DISCIPLE 

The  meeting  of  Narendranath  and  Sri  Ramakrishna  was  an  important  event 
in  the  lives  of  both.  A  storm  had  been  raging  in  Narendra’s  soul  when  he  came 
to  Sri  Ramakrishna,  who  himself  had  passed  through  a  similar  struggle  but  was 
now  firmly  anchored  in  peace  as  a  result  of  his  intimate  communion  with  the 
Godhead  and  his  realization  of  Brahman  as  the  immutable  essence  of  all  things. 

A  genuine  product  of  the  Indian  soil  and  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the 
spiritual  traditions  of  India,  Sri  Ramakrishna  was  ignorant  of  the  modern  way 
of  thinking.  But  Narendra  was  the  symbol  of  the  modern  spirit.  Inquisitive, 
alert,  and  intellectually  honest,  he  possessed  an  open  mind  and  demanded 
rational  proof  before  accepting  any  conclusion  as  valid.  As  a  loyal  member  of 
the  Brahmo  Samaj  he  was  critical  of  image  worship  and  the  rituals  of  the  Hindu 
religion.  He  did  not  feel  the  need  of  a  guru,  a  human  intermediary  between 
God  and  man.  He  was  even  sceptical  about  the  existence  of  such  a  person,  who 
was  said  to  be  free  from  human  limitations  and  to  whom  an  aspirant  was 
expected  to  surrender  himself  completely  and  offer  worship  as  to  God.  Rama- 
krishna’s  visions  of  gods  and  goddesses  he  openly  ridiculed,  and  called  them 
hallucinations. 

For  five  years  Narendra  closely  watched  the  Master,  never  allowing  himself 


Vivekananda 


15 


to  be  influenced  by  blind  faith,  always  testing  the  words  and  actions  of  §ri 
Ramakrishna  in  the  crucible  of  reason.  It  cost  him  many  sorrows  and  much 
anguish  before  he  accepted  Sri  Ramakrishna  as  the  guru  and  the  ideal  of  his 
spiritual  life.  But  when  the  acceptance  came,  it  was  wholehearted,  final,  and 
irrevocable.  The  Master,  too,  was  overjoyed  to  find  a  disciple  who  doubted,  and 
he  knew  that  Naren  was  the  one  to  carry  his  message  to  the  world. 

The  inner  process  that  gradually  transformed  the  chrysalis  of  Narendra 
into  a  beautiful  butterfly  will  for  ever  remain,  like  all  deep  spiritual  mysteries, 
unknown  to  the  outer  world.  People,  however,  noticed  the  growth  of  an  inti¬ 
mate  relationship  between  the  loving,  patient,  and  forgiving  teacher  and  his 
imperious  and  stubborn  disciple.  The  Master  never  once  asked  Naren  to  aban¬ 
don  reason.  He  met  the  challenge  of  Naren’s  intellect  with  his  superior  under¬ 
standing,  acquired  through  first-hand  knowledge  of  the  essence  of  things.  When 
Naren’s  reasoning  failed  to  solve  the  ultimate  mystery,  the  teacher  gave  him 
the  necessary  insight.  Thus,  with  infinite  patience,  love,  and  vigilance,  he 
tamed  the  rebellious  spirit,  demanding  complete  obedience  to  moral  and  spiritual 
disciplines,  without  which  the  religious  life  cannot  be  built  on  a  firm  founda¬ 
tion. 

The  very  presence  of  Narendranath  would  fill  the  Master’s  mind  with  inde¬ 
scribable  joy  and  create  ecstatic  moods.  He  had  already  known,  by  many  indica¬ 
tions,  of  the  disciple’s  future  greatness,  the  manifestation  of  which  awaited 
only  the  fullness  of  time.  What  others  regarded  in  Naren  as  stubbornness  or 
haughtiness  appeared  to  Sri  Ramakrishna  as  the  expression  of  his  manliness 
and  self-reliance,  born  of  his  self-control  and  innate  purity.  He  could  not  bear 
the  slightest  criticism  of  Naren  and  often  said:  “Let  no  one  judge  him  hastily. 
People  will  never  understand  him  fully.” 

Ramakrishna  loved  Narendranath  because  he  saw  him  as  the  embodiment 
of  Narayana,  the  Divine  Spirit,  undefiled  by  the  foul  breath  of  the  world.  But 
he  was  criticized  for  his  attachment.  Once  a  trouble-maker  of  twisted  mind 
named  Hazra,  who  lived  with  the  Master  at  Dakshineswar,  said  to  him,  “If  you 
long  for  Naren  and  the  other  youngsters  all  the  time,  when  will  you  think  of 
God?”  The  Master  was  distressed  by  this  thought.  But  it  was  at  once  revealed 
to  him  that  though  God  dwelt  in  all  beings,  He  was  especially  manifest  in  a 
pure  soul  like  Naren.  Relieved  of  his  worries,  he  then  said:  “Oh,  what  a  fool 
Hazra  is!  How  he  unsettled  my  mind!  But  why  blame  the  poor  fellow?  How 
could  he  know?” 

Sri  Ramakrishna  was  outspoken  in  Narendra’s  praise.  This  often  embarrassed 
the  young  disciple,  who  would  criticize  the  Master  for  what  he  termed  a  sort 
of  infatuation.  One  day  Ramakrishna  said  in  the  presence  of  Keshab  Sen  and 
the  saintly  Vi  jay  Goswami,  the  two  outstanding  leaders  of  the  Brahmo  Samaj: 
“If  Keshab  possesses  one  virtue  which  has  made  him  world-famous,  Naren  is 
endowed  with  eighteen  such  virtues.  I  have  seen  in  Keshab  and  Vijay  the 
divine  light  burning  like  a  candle  flame,  but  in  Naren  it  shines  with  the  radiance 
of  the  sun.” 

Narendra,  instead  of  feeling  flattered  by  these  compliments,  became  annoyed 
and  sharply  rebuked  the  Master  for  what  he  regarded  as  his  foolhardiness.  “I 


16 


Vivekananda 


cannot  help  it/'  the  Master  protested.  ‘‘Do  you  think  these  are  my  words? 
The  Divine  Mother  showed  me  certain  things  about  you,  which  I  repeated. 
And  She  reveals  to  me  nothing  but  the  truth/’ 

But  Narcn  was  hardly  convinced.  He  was  sure  that  these  so-called  revelations 
were  pure  illusions.  He  carefully  explained  to  Sri  Ramakrishna  that,  from  the 
viewpoint  of  Western  science  and  philosophy,  very  often  a  man  is  deceived 
by  his  mind,  and  that  the  chances  of  deception  are  greater  when  a  personal 
attachment  is  involved.  He  said  to  the  Master,  “Since  you  love  me  and  wish  to 
see  me  great,  these  fancies  naturally  come  to  your  mind.” 

The  Master  was  perplexed.  He  prayed  to  the  Divine  Mother  for  light  and 
was  told:  “Why  do  you  care  about  what  he  says?  In  a  short  time  he  will  accept 
your  every  word  as  true.” 

On  another  occasion,  when  the  Master  was  similarly  reprimanded  by  the 
disciple,  he  was  reassured  by  the  Divine  Mother.  Thereupon  he  said  to  Naren 
with  a  smile:  “You  are  a  rogue.  I  won’t  listen  to  you  any  more.  Mother  says 
that  I  love  you  because  I  see  the  Lord  in  you.  The  day  I  shall  not  see  Him  in 
you,  I  shall  not  be  able  to  bear  even  the  sight  of  you.” 

On  account  of  his  preoccupation  with  his  studies,  or  for  other  reasons, 
Narendra  could  not  come  to  Dakshineswar  as  often  as  Sri  Ramakrishna  wished. 
But  the  Master  could  hardly  endure  his  prolonged  absence.  If  the  disciple 
had  not  visited  him  for  a  number  of  days,  he  would  send  someone  to  Calcutta 
to  fetch  him.  Sometimes  he  went  to  Calcutta  himself.  One  time,  for  example, 
Narendra  remained  away  from  Dakshineswar  for  several  weeks;  even  the  Mas¬ 
ter’s  eager  importunities  had  failed  to  bring  him.  Sri  Ramakrishna  knew  that 
he  sang  regularly  at  the  prayer  meetings  of  the  Brahmo  Samaj,  and  so  one  day 
he  made  his  way  to  the  Brahmo  temple  that  the  disciple  attended.  Narendra  was 
singing  as  the  Master  entered  the  hall,  and  when  he  heard  Narendra’s  voice,  Sri 
Ramakrishna  fell  into  a  deep  ecstasy.  The  eyes  of  the  congregation  turned  to  him, 
and  soon  a  commotion  followed.  Narendra  hurried  to  his  side.  One  of  the 
Brahmo  leaders,  in  order  to  stop  the  excitement,  put  out  the  lights.  The  young 
disciple,  realizing  that  the  Master’s  sudden  appearance  was  the  cause  of  the 
disturbance,  sharply  took  him  to  task.  The  latter  answered,  with  tears  in  his 
eyes,  that  he  had  simply  not  been  able  to  keep  himself  away  from  Narendra. 

On  another  occasion  a  comical  incident  occurred  that  reveals  a  different 
side  of  Narendra’s  character.  That  day,  too,  Sri  Ramakrishna  had  been  unable 
to  bear  Narendra’s  absence,  and  he  had  gone  to  Calcutta  to  visit  the  disciple 
at  his  own  home.  He  was  told  that  Naren  was  studying  in  an  attic  that  could 
be  reached  only  by  a  steep  ladder.  A  disciple  named  Latu,  who  was  a  sort  of 
caretaker  of  the  Master,  had  accompanied  him,  and  with  Latu’s  help  Sri  Rama¬ 
krishna  climbed  a  few  steps  of  the  ladder.  Narendra  opened  the  door,  and  at 
the  very  sight  of  him  Sri  Ramakrishna  exclaimed,  “Naren,  my  beloved!”  and 
went  into  ecstasy.  With  considerable  difficulty  the  two  disciples  helped  him  to 
finish  climbing  the  ladder,  and  as  he  entered  the  room  the  Master  fell  into 
deep  samadhi.  A  fellow  student  who  was  with  Naren  at  the  time  and  did  not 
know  anything  of  religious  trances,  asked  Naren  in  bewilderment,  “Who  is  this 
man?” 

“Never  mind,”  replied  Naren.  “He  is  an  idiot.  You  had  better  go  home  now.” 


Vivekananda 


17 


After  a  while  Sri  Ramakrishna  regained  ordinary  consciousness.  Latu,  who  was 
illiterate,  had  heard  the  English  word  idiot  and  remembered  it.  He  now  asked 
Naren  its  meaning.  When  the  word  was  explained  to  him,  he  flew  into  a  rage, 
asking  Naren  how  he  dared  apply  such  an  insulting  word  to  Sri  Ramakrishna. 
Naren  tried  to  pacify  him  and  declared  that  since  his  friend  did  not  have  the 
slightest  idea  about  ecstasy,  and  since  he  could  not  possibly  have  explained  to 
him  the  meaning  of  samadhi,  he  had  thought  that  the  easiest  way  of  avoiding 
an  endless  discussion  with  his  friend  was  simply  to  describe  Sri  Ramakrishna 
as  an  idiot. 

Naren  often  said  that  the  “Old  Man,”  meaning  Ramakrishna,  bound  the 
disciple  for  ever  to  him  by  his  love.  “What  do  worldly  men,”  he  remarked, 
“know  about  love?  They  only  make  a  show  of  it.  The  Master  alone  loves  us 
genuinely.”  Naren,  in  return,  bore  a  deep  love  for  Sri  Ramakrishna,  though  he 
seldom  expressed  it  in  words.  He  took  delight  in  criticizing  the  Master’s  spiritual 
experiences  as  evidences  of  a  lack  of  self-control.  He  made  fun  of  his  worship 
of  Kali. 

“Why  do  you  come  here,”  Sri  Ramakrishna  once  asked  him,  “if  you  do  not 
accept  Kali,  my  Mother?” 

“Bah!  Must  I  accept  Her,”  Naren  retorted,  “simply  because  I  come  to  see 
you?  I  come  to  you  because  I  love  you.” 

“All  right,”  said  the  Master,  “ere  long  you  will  not  only  accept  my  blessed 
Mother,  but  weep  in  Her  name.” 

Turning  to  his  other  disciples,  he  said:  “This  boy  has  no  faith  in  the  forms 
of  God  and  tells  me  that  my  visions  are  pure  imagination.  But  he  is  a  fine  lad 
of  pure  mind.  He  does  not  accept  anything  without  direct  evidence.  He  has 
studied  much  and  cultivated  great  discrimination.  He  has  fine  judgement.” 

TRAINING  OF  THE  DISCIPLE 

It  is  hard  to  say  when  Naren  actually  accepted  Sri  Ramakrishna  as  his  guru. 
As  far  as  the  Master  was  concerned,  the  spiritual  relationship  was  established 
at  the  first  meeting  at  Dakshineswar,  when  he  had  touched  Naren,  stirring  him 
to  his  inner  depths.  From  that  moment  he  had  implicit  faith  in  the  disciple  and 
bore  him  a  great  love.  But  he  encouraged  Naren  in  the  independence  of  his 
thinking.  The  love  and  faith  of  the  Master  acted  as  a  restraint  upon  the  impetu¬ 
ous  youth  and  became  his  strong  shield  against  the  temptations  of  the  world. 
By  gradual  steps  the  disciple  was  then  led  from  doubt  to  certainty,  and  from 
anguish  of  mind  to  the  bliss  of  the  Spirit.  This,  however,  was  not  an  easy  attain¬ 
ment. 

Sri  Ramakrishna,  perfect  teacher  that  he  was,  never  laid  down  identical  dis¬ 
ciplines  for  disciples  of  diverse  temperaments.  He  did  not  insist  that  Narendra 
should  follow  strict  rules  about  food,  nor  did  he  ask  him  to  believe  in  the  reality 
of  the  gods  and  goddesses  of  Hindu  mythology.  It  was  not  necessary  for  Naren- 
dra’s  philosophic  mind  to  pursue  the  disciplines  of  concrete  worship.  But  a 
strict  eye  was  kept  on  Naren’s  practice  of  discrimination,  detachment,  self-con¬ 
trol,  and  regular  meditation.  Sri  Ramakrishna  enjoyed  Naren’s  vehement  argu¬ 
ments  with  the  other  devotees  regarding  the  dogmas  and  creeds  of  religion 
and  was  delighted  to  hear  him  tear  to  shreds  their  unquestioning  beliefs.  But 


18 


Vivekananda 


when,  as  often  happened,  Naren  teased  the  gentle  Rakhal  for  showing  reverence 
to  the  Divine  Mother  Kali,  the  Master  would  not  tolerate  these  attempts  to 
unsettle  the  brother  disciple’s  faith  in  the  forms  of  God. 

As  a  member  of  the  Brahmo  Samaj,  Narendra  accepted  its  doctrine  of  mono¬ 
theism  and  the  Personal  God.  He  also  believed  in  the  natural  depravity  of  man. 
Such  doctrines  of  non-dualistic  Vedanta  as  the  divinity  of  the  soul  and  the 
oneness  of  existence  he  regarded  as  blasphemy;  the  view  that  man  is  one  with 
God  appeared  to  him  pure  nonsense.  When  the  Master  warned  him  against 
thus  limiting  God’s  infinitude  and  asked  him  to  pray  to  God  to  reveal  to  him 
His  true  nature,  Narendra  smiled.  One  day  he  was  making  fun  of  Sri  Rama- 
krishna’s  non-dualism  before  a  friend  and  said,  “What  can  be  more  absurd 
than  to  say  that  this  jug  is  God,  this  cup  is  God,  and  that  we  too  are  God?” 
Both  roared  with  laughter. 

Just  then  the  Master  appeared.  Coming  to  learn  the  cause  of  their  fun,  he 
gently  touched  Naren  and  plunged  into  deep  samadhi.  The  touch  produced 
a  magic  effect,  and  Narendra  entered  a  new  realm  of  consciousness.  He  saw 
the  whole  universe  permeated  by  the  Divine  Spirit  and  returned  home  in  a 
daze.  While  eating  his  meal,  he  felt  the  presence  of  Brahman  in  everything — 
in  the  food,  and  in  himself  too.  While  walking  in  the  street,  he  saw  the  car¬ 
riages,  the  horses,  the  crowd,  and  himself  as  if  made  of  the  same  substance. 
After  a  few  days  the  intensity  of  the  vision  lessened  to  some  extent,  but  still 
he  could  see  the  world  only  as  a  dream.  While  strolling  in  the  public  park  of 
Calcutta,  he  struck  his  head  against  the  iron  railings,  several  times,  to  see  if 
they  were  real  or  a  mere  illusion  of  the  mind.  Thus  he  got  a  glimpse  of  non¬ 
dualism,  the  fullest  realization  of  which  was  to  come  only  later,  at  the  Cossi- 
pore  garden. 

Sri  Ramakrishna  was  always  pleased  when  his  disciples  put  to  the  test  his 
statements  or  behaviour  before  accepting  his  teachings.  He  would  say:  “Test 
me  as  the  money-changers  test  their  coins.  You  must  not  believe  me  without 
testing  me  thoroughly.”  The  disciples  often  heard  him  say  that  his  nervous 
system  had  undergone  a  complete  change  as  a  result  of  his  spiritual  experiences, 
and  that  he  could  not  bear  the  touch  of  any  metal,  such  as  gold  or  silver.  One 
day,  during  his  absence  in  Calcutta,  Narendra  hid  a  coin  under  Ramakrishna’s 
bed.  After  his  return,  when  the  Master  sat  on  the  bed,  he  started  up  in  pain  as  if 
stung  by  an  insect.  The  mattress  was  examined  and  the  hidden  coin  was  found. 

Naren,  on  the  other  hand,  was  often  tested  by  the  Master.  One  day,  when  he 
entered  the  Master’s  room,  he  was  completely  ignored.  Not  a  word  of  greet¬ 
ing  was  uttered.  A  week  later  he  came  back  and  met  with  the  same  indifference, 
and  during  the  third  and  fourth  visits  saw  no  evidence  of  any  thawing  of  the 
Master’s  frigid  attitude. 

At  the  end  of  a  month  Sri  Ramakrishna  said  to  Naren,  “I  have  not  exchanged 
a  single  word  with  you  all  this  time,  and  still  you  come.” 

The  disciple  replied:  “I  come  to  Dakshineswar  because  I  love  you  and  want 
to  see  you.  I  do  not  come  here  to  hear  your  words.” 

The  Master  was  overjoyed.  Embracing  the  disciple,  he  said:  “I  was  only 
testing  you.  I  wanted  to  see  if  you  would  stay  away  on  account  of  my  outward 


Vivekananda  19 

indifference.  Only  a  man  of  your  inner  strength  could  put  up  with  such  indif¬ 
ference  on  my  part.  Anyone  else  would  have  left  me  long  ago." 

On  one  occasion  Sri  Ramakrishna  proposed  to  transfer  to  Narendranath 
many  of  the  spiritual  powers  that  he  had  acquired  as  a  result  of  his  ascetic 
disciplines  and  visions  of  God.  Naren  had  no  doubt  concerning  the  Master’s 
possessing  such  powers.  He  asked  if  they  would  help  him  to  realize  God.  Sri 
Ramakrishna  replied  in  the  negative  but  added  that  they  might  assist  him 
in  his  future  work  as  a  spiritual  teacher.  “Let  me  realize  God  first/’  said  Naren, 
“and  then  I  shall  perhaps  know  whether  or  not  I  want  supernatural  powers. 
If  I  accept  them  now,  I  may  forget  God,  make  selfish  use  of  them,  and  thus 
come  to  grief.”  Sri  Ramakrishna  was  highly  pleased  to  see  his  chief  disciple’s 
single-minded  devotion. 


narendra’s  struggle 

Several  factors  were  at  work  to  mould  the  personality  of  young  Narendranath. 
Foremost  of  these  were  his  inborn  spiritual  tendencies,  which  were  beginning 
to  show  themselves  under  the  influence  of  Sri  Ramakrishna,  but  against  which 
his  rational  mind  put  up  a  strenuous  fight.  Second  was  his  habit  of  thinking 
highly  and  acting  nobly,  disciplines  acquired  from  a  mother  steeped  in  the 
spiritual  heritage  of  India.  Third  were  his  broadmindedness  and  regard  for  truth 
wherever  found,  and  his  sceptical  attitude  towards  the  religious  beliefs  and  social 
conventions  of  the  Hindu  society  of  his  time.  These  he  had  learnt  from  his 
English-educated  father,  and  he  was  strengthened  in  them  through  his  own 
contact  with  Western  culture. 

With  the  introduction  in  India  of  English  education  during  the  middle 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  as  we  have  seen,  Western  science,  history,  and 
philosophy  were  studied  in  the  Indian  colleges  and  universities.  The  educated 
Hindu  youths,  allured  by  the  glamour,  began  to  mould  their  thought  according 
to  this  new  light,  and  Narendra  could  not  escape  the  influence.  He  developed 
a  great  respect  for  the  analytical  scientific  method  and  subjected  many  of  the 
Master’s  spiritual  visions  to  such  scrutiny.  The  English  poets  stirred  his  feel¬ 
ings,  especially  Wordsworth  and  Shelley,  and  he  took  a  course  in  Western 
medical  science  to  understand  the  functioning  of  the  nervous  system,  particularly 
the  brain  and  spinal  cord,  in  order  to  find  out  the  secrets  of  Sri  Ramakrishna’s 
trances.  But  all  this  only  deepened  his  inner  turmoil. 

John  Stuart  Mill’s  Three  Essays  on  Religion  upset  his  boyish  theism  and  the 
easy  optimism  imbibed  from  the  Brahmo  Samaj.  The  presence  of  evil  in  nature 
and  man  haunted  him  and  he  could  not  reconcile  it  at  all  with  the  goodness 
of  an  omnipotent  Creator.  Hume’s  scepticism  and  Herbert  Spencer’s  doctrine 
of  the  Unknowable  filled  his  mind  with  a  settled  philosophical  agnosticism. 
After  the  wearing  out  of  his  first  emotional  freshness  and  naivete,  he  was  beset 
with  a  certain  dryness  and  incapacity  for  the  old  prayers  and  devotions.  He  was 
filled  with  an  ennui  which  he  concealed,  however,  under  his  jovial  nature. 
Music,  at  this  difficult  stage  of  his  life,  rendered  him  great  help;  for  it  moved 
him  as  nothing  else  and  gave  him  a  glimpse  of  unseen  realities  that  often 
brought  tears  to  his  eyes. 


20 


Vivekananda 


Narendra  did  not  have  much  patience  with  humdrum  reading,  nor  did  he 
care  to  absorb  knowledge  from  books  as  much  as  from  living  communion  and 
personal  experience.  He  wanted  life  to  be  kindled  by  life,  and  thought  kindled 
by  thought.  He  studied  Shelley  under  a  college  friend,  Brajendranath  Seal, 
who  later  became  the  leading  Indian  philosopher  of  his  time,  and  deeply  felt 
with  the  poet  his  pantheism,  impersonal  love,  and  vision  of  a  glorified  millennial 
humanity.  The  universe,  no  longer  a  mere  lifeless,  loveless  mechanism,  was  seen 
to  contain  a  spiritual  principle  of  unity.  Brajendranath,  moreover,  tried  to 
present  him  with  a  synthesis  of  the  Supreme  Brahman  of  Vedanta,  the  Universal 
Reason  of  Hegel,  and  the  gospel  of  Liberty,  Equality,  and  Fraternity  of  the 
French  Revolution.  By  accepting  as  the  principle  of  morals  the  sovereignty 
of  Universal  Reason  and  the  negation  of  the  individual,  Narendra  achieved 
an  intellectual  victory  over  scepticism  and  materialism,  but  no  peace  of  mind. 

Narendra  now  had  to  face  a  new  difficulty.  The  “ballet  of  bloodless  categories" 
of  Hegel  and  his  creed  of  Universal  Reason  required  of  Naren  a  suppression 
of  the  yearning  and  susceptibility  of  his  artistic  nature  and  joyous  temperament, 
the  destruction  of  the  cravings  of  his  keen  and  acute  senses,  and  the  smother¬ 
ing  of  his  free  and  merry  conviviality.  This  amounted  almost  to  killing  his  own 
true  self.  Further,  he  could  not  find  in  such  a  philosophy  any  help  in  the  strug¬ 
gle  of  a  hot-blooded  youth  against  the  cravings  of  the  passions,  which  appeared 
to  him  as  impure,  gross,  and  carnal.  Some  of  his  musical  associates  were  men 
of  loose  morals  for  whom  he  felt  a  bitter  and  undisguised  contempt. 

Narendra  therefore  asked  his  friend  Brajendra  if  the  latter  knew  the  way  of 
deliverance  from  the  bondage  of  the  senses,  but  he  was  told  only  to  rely 
upon  Pure  Reason  and  to  identify  the  self  with  it,  and  was  promised  that 
through  this  he  would  experience  an  ineffable  peace.  The  friend  was  a  Platonic 
transcendentalist  and  did  not  have  faith  in  what  he  called  the  artificial  prop 
of  grace,  or  the  mediation  of  a  guru.  But  the  problems  and  difficulties  of 
Narendra  were  very  different  from  those  of  his  intellectual  friend.  Fie  found 
that  mere  philosophy  was  impotent  in  the  hour  of  temptation  and  in  the  strug¬ 
gle  for  his  soul's  deliverance.  He  felt  the  need  of  a  hand  to  save,  to  uplift,  to 
protect — a  sakti  or  power  outside  his  rational  mind  that  would  transform  his 
impotence  into  strength  and  glory.  He  wanted  a  flcsh-and-blood  reality  estab¬ 
lished  in  peace  and  certainty,  in  short,  a  living  guru,  who,  by  embodying  per¬ 
fection  in  the  flesh,  would  compose  the  commotion  of  his  soul. 

The  leaders  of  the  Brahmo  Samaj,  as  well  as  those  of  the  other  religious  sects, 
had  failed.  It  was  only  Ramakrishna  who  spoke  to  him  with  authority,  as  none 
had  spoken  before,  and  by  his  power  brought  peace  into  the  troubled  soul 
and  healed  the  wounds  of  the  spirit.  At  first  Naren  feared  that  the  serenity 
that  possessed  him  in  the  presence  of  the  Master  was  illusory,  but  his  misgivings 
were  gradually  vanquished  by  the  calm  assurance  transmitted  to  him  by  Rama¬ 
krishna  out  of  his  own  experience  of  Satchidananda  Brahman — Existence, 
Knowledge,  and  Bliss  Absolute.1 

Narendra  could  not  but  recognize  the  contrast  of  the  Sturm  und  Drang  of 

1  This  account  of  the  struggle  of  Naren’s  collegiate  days  summarizes  an  article  on 
Swami  Vivekananda  by  Brajendranath  Seal,  published  in  the  Life  of  Swami  Vivekananda 
by  the  Advaita  Asrama,  Mayavati,  India. 


Vivekananda 


21 


his  soul  with  the  serene  bliss  in  which  Sri  Ramakrishna  was  always  bathed. 
He  begged  the  Master  to  teach  him  meditation,  and  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  reply 
was  to  him  a  source  of  comfort  and  strength.  The  Master  said:  “God  listens 
to  our  sincere  prayer.  I  can  swear  that  you  can  see  God  and  talk  with  Him 
as  intensely  as  you  see  me  and  talk  with  me.  You  can  hear  His  words  and  feel 
His  touch.”  Further  the  Master  declared:  “You  may  not  believe  in  divine  forms, 
but  if  you  believe  in  an  Ultimate  Reality  who  is  the  Regulator  of  the  universe, 
you  can  pray  to  Him  thus:  ‘O  God,  I  do  not  know  Thee.  Be  gracious  to  reveal 
to  me  Thy  real  nature.’  He  will  certainly  listen  to  you  if  your  prayer  is  sincere.” 

Narendra,  intensifying  his  meditation  under  the  Master’s  guidance,  began 
to  lose  consciousness  of  the  body  and  to  feel  an  inner  peace,  and  this  peace 
would  linger  even  after  the  meditation  was  over.  Frequently  he  felt  the  separa¬ 
tion  of  the  body  from  the  soul.  Strange  perceptions  came  to  him  in  dreams, 
producing  a  sense  of  exaltation  that  persisted  after  he  awoke.  The  guru  was 
performing  his  task  in  an  inscrutable  manner.  Narendra’s  friends  observed  only 
his  outer  struggle;  but  the  real  transformation  was  known  to  the  teacher  alone — 
or  perhaps  to  the  disciple  too. 


BEREAVEMENT 

In  1884,  when  Narendranath  was  preparing  for  the  B.A.  examination,  his 
family  was  struck  by  a  calamity.  His  father  suddenly  died,  and  the  mother  and 
children  were  plunged  into  great  grief.  For  Viswanath,  a  man  of  generous 
nature,  had  lived  beyond  his  means,  and  his  death  burdened  the  family  with  a 
heavy  debt.  Creditors,  like  hungry  wolves,  began  to  prowl  about  the  door,  and 
to  make  matters  worse,  certain  relatives  brought  a  lawsuit  for  the  partition  of 
the  ancestral  home.  Though  they  lost  it,  Narendra  was  faced,  thereafter,  with 
poverty.  As  the  eldest  male  member  of  the  family,  he  had  to  find  the  where¬ 
withal  for  the  feeding  of  seven  or  eight  mouths.  He  attended  the  law  classes 
clad  in  coarse  clothes,  barefoot,  and  hungry,  and  often  refused  invitations  for 
dinner  from  friends,  remembering  his  starving  mother,  brothers,  and  sisters 
at  home.  He  would  skip  family  meals  on  the  fictitious  plea  that  he  had  already 
eaten  at  a  friend’s  house,  so  that  the  people  at  home  might  receive  a  larger 
share  of  the  scanty  food.  The  Datta  family  was  proud  and  would  not  dream 
of  soliciting  help  from  outsiders.  With  his  companions  Narendra  was  his  usual 
gay  self.  His  rich  friends  no  doubt  noticed  his  pale  face,  but  they  did  nothing 
to  help.  Only  one  friend  sent  occasional  anonymous  aid,  and  Narendra  remained 
grateful  to  him  for  life.  Meanwhile,  all  his  efforts  to  find  employment  failed. 
Some  friends  who  earned  money  in  a  dishonest  way  asked  him  to  join  them,  and 
a  rich  woman  sent  him  an  immoral  proposal,  promising  to  put  an  end  to  his 
financial  distress.  But  Narendra  gave  to  these  a  blunt  rebuff.  Sometimes  he 
would  wonder  if  the  world  were  not  the  handiwork  of  the  Devil — for  how  could 
one  account  for  so  much  suffering  in  God’s  creation? 

One  day,  after  a  futile  search  for  a  job,  he  sat  down,  weary  and  footsore,  in  the 
big  park  of  Calcutta.  There  some  friends  joined  him  and  one  of  them  sang  a 
song,  perhaps  to  console  him,  describing  God’s  abundant  grace. 

Furiously  Naren  said:  “Will  you  please  stop  that  song?  Such  fancies  are, 
no  doubt,  pleasing  to  those  who  are  born  with  silver  spoons  in  their  mouths. 


22  Vivekananda 

Yes,  there  was  a  time  when  I,  too,  thought  like  that.  But  today  these  ideas 
appear  to  me  a  mockery.” 

The  friends  were  bewildered. 

One  morning,  as  usual,  Naren  left  his  bed  repeating  God’s  name,  and  was 
about  to  go  out  in  search  of  work  after  seeking  divine  blessings.  His  mother 
heard  the  prayer  and  said  bitterly:  “Hush,  you  fool!  You  have  been  crying  your¬ 
self  hoarse  for  God  since  your  childhood.  Tell  me  what  has  God  done  for  you?” 
Evidently  the  crushing  poverty  at  home  was  too  much  for  the  pious  mother. 

These  words  stung  Naren  to  the  quick.  A  doubt  crept  into  his  mind  about 
God’s  existence  and  His  Providence. 

It  was  not  in  Naren’s  nature  to  hide  his  feelings.  He  argued  before  his  friends 
and  the  devotees  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  about  God’s  non-existence  and  the  futility 
of  prayer  even  if  God  existed.  His  over-zealous  friends  thought  he  had  become  an 
atheist  and  ascribed  to  him  many  unmentionable  crimes,  which  he  had  sup¬ 
posedly  committed  to  forget  his  misery.  Some  of  the  devotees  of  the  Master 
shared  these  views.  Narendra  cried  in  anguish  and  roared  with  anger,  mortified 
to  think  that  they  could  believe  him  to  have  sunk  so  low.  He  became  hardened 
and  justified  drinking  and  the  other  dubious  pleasures  resorted  to  by  miser¬ 
able  people  for  a  respite  from  their  suffering.  He  said,  further,  that  he  himself 
would  not  hesitate  to  follow  such  a  course  if  he  were  assured  of  its  efficacy. 
Openly  asserting  that  only  cowards  believed  in  God  for  fear  of  hell-fire,  he 
argued  the  possibility  of  God’s  non-existence  and  quoted  Western  philosophers 
in  support  of  his  position.  And  when  the  devotees  of  the  Master  became  con¬ 
vinced  that  he  was  hopelessly  lost,  he  felt  a  sort  of  inner  satisfaction. 

A  garbled  report  of  the  matter  reached  Sri  Ramakrishna,  and  Narendra 
thought  that  perhaps  the  Master,  too,  doubted  his  moral  integrity.  The  very 
idea  revived  his  anger.  “Never  mind,”  he  said  to  himself.  “If  good  or  bad 
opinion  of  a  man  rests  on  such  flimsy  grounds,  I  don’t  care.” 

But  Narendra  was  mistaken.  For  one  day  Bhavanath,  a  devotee  of  the  Master 
and  an  intimate  friend  of  Narendra,  cast  aspersions  on  the  latter’s  character, 
and  the  Master  said  angrily:  “Stop,  you  fool!  The  Mother  has  told  me  that  it 
is  simply  not  true.  I  shan’t  look  at  your  face  if  you  speak  to  me  again  that  way.” 

The  fact  was  that  Narendra  could  not,  in  his  heart  of  hearts,  disbelieve  in 
God.  He  remembered  the  spiritual  visions  of  his  own  boyhood  and  many  others 
that  he  had  experienced  in  the  company  of  the  Master.  Inwardly  he  longed 
to  understand  God  and  His  ways.  And  one  day  he  gained  this  understanding. 
It  happened  in  the  following  way: 

He  had  been  out  since  morning  in  a  soaking  rain  in  search  of  employment, 
having  had  neither  food  nor  rest  for  the  whole  day.  That  evening  he  sat  down 
on  the  porch  of  a  house  by  the  roadside,  exhausted.  He  was  in  a  daze.  Thoughts 
began  to  flit  before  his  mind,  which  he  could  not  control.  Suddenly  he  had  a 
strange  vision,  which  lasted  almost  the  whole  night.  He  felt  that  veil  after  veil 
was  removed  from  before  his  soul,  and  he  understood  the  reconciliation  of  God’s 
justice  with  His  mercy.  He  came  to  know — but  he  never  told  how — that  misery 
could  exist  in  the  creation  of  a  compassionate  God  without  impairing  His 
sovereign  power  or  touching  man’s  real  self.  He  understood  the  meaning  of  it 


Vivekananda  23 

all  and  was  at  peace,  fust  before  daybreak,  refreshed  both  in  body  and  in  mind, 
he  returned  home. 

This  revelation  profoundly  impressed  Narendranath.  He  became  indifferent 
to  people’s  opinion  and  was  convinced  that  he  was  not  born  to  lead  an  ordinary 
worldly  life,  enjoying  the  love  of  a  wife  and  children  and  physical  luxuries. 
He  recalled  how  the  several  proposals  of  marriage  made  by  his  relatives  had 
come  to  nothing,  and  he  ascribed  all  this  to  God’s  will.  The  peace  and  freedom 
of  the  monastic  life  cast  a  spell  upon  him.  He  determined  to  renounce  the 
world,  and  set  a  date  for  this  act.  Then,  coming  to  learn  that  §ri  Ramakrishna 
would  visit  Calcutta  that  very  day,  he  was  happy  to  think  that  he  could  embrace 
the  life  of  a  wandering  monk  with  his  guru’s  blessings. 

When  they  met,  the  Master  persuaded  his  disciple  to  accompany  him  to 
Dakshineswar.  As  they  arrived  in  his  room,  Sri  Ramakrishna  went  into  an 
ecstatic  mood  and  sang  a  song,  while  tears  bathed  his  eyes.  The  words  of  the 
song  clearly  indicated  that  the  Master  knew  of  the  disciple’s  secret  wish.  When 
other  devotees  asked  him  about  the  cause  of  his  grief,  Sri  Ramakrishna  said, 
“Oh,  never  mind,  it  is  something  between  me  and  Naren,  and  nobody  else’s 
business.”  At  night  he  called  Naren  to  his  side  and  said  with  great  feeling:  “I 
know  you  are  born  for  Mother’s  work.  I  also  know  that  you  will  be  a  monk. 
But  stay  in  the  world  as  long  as  I  live,  for  my  sake  at  least.”  He  wept  again. 

Next  day  Naren  procured  a  temporary  job,  which  was  sufficient  to  provide  a 
hand-to-mouth  living  for  the  family. 

One  day  Narendra  asked  himself  why,  since  Kali,  the  Divine  Mother,  listened 
to  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  prayers,  should  not  the  Master  pray  to  Her  to  relieve 
his  poverty.  When  he  spoke  to  Sri  Ramakrishna  about  this  idea,  the  latter 
inquired  why  he  did  not  pray  himself  to  Kali,  adding  that  Narendranath  suffered 
because  he  did  not  acknowledge  Kali  as  the  Sovereign  Mistress  of  the  universe. 

“Today,”  the  Master  continued,  “is  a  Tuesday,  an  auspicious  day  for  the 
Mother’s  worship.  Go  to  Her  shrine  in  the  evening,  prostrate  yourself  before 
the  image,  and  pray  to  Her  for  any  boon;  it  will  be  granted.  Mother  Kali  is 
the  embodiment  of  Love  and  Compassion.  She  is  the  Power  of  Brahman. 
She  gives  birth  to  the  world  by  Her  mere  wish.  She  fulfils  every  sincere  prayer 
of  Her  devotees.” 

At  nine  o’clock  in  the  evening,  Narendranath  went  to  the  Kali  temple.  Pass¬ 
ing  through  the  courtyard,  he  felt  within  himself  a  surge  of  emotion,  and  his 
heart  leapt  with  joy  in  anticipation  of  the  vision  of  the  Divine  Mother.  Enter¬ 
ing  the  temple,  he  cast  his  eyes  upon  the  image  and  found  the  stone  figure 
to  be  nothing  else  but  the  living  Goddess,  the  Divine  Mother  Herself,  ready 
to  give  him  any  boon  he  wanted — either  a  happy  worldly  life  or  the  joy  of 
spiritual  freedom.  He  was  in  ecstasy.  He  prayed  for  the  boon  of  wisdom,  dis¬ 
crimination,  renunciation,  and  Her  uninterrupted  vision,  but  forgot  to  ask  the 
Deity  for  money.  He  felt  great  peace  within  as  he  returned  to  the  Master’s  room, 
and  when  asked  if  he  had  prayed  for  money,  was  startled.  He  said  that  he 
had  forgotten  all  about  it.  The  Master  told  him  to  go  to  the  temple  again  and 
pray  to  the  Divine  Mother  to  satisfy  his  immediate  needs.  Naren  did  as  he  was 
bidden,  but  again  forgot  his  mission.  The  same  thing  happened  a  third  time. 


Vivekananda 


24 

Then  Naren  suddenly  realized  that  Sri  Ramakrishna  himself  had  made  him 
forget  to  ask  the  Divine  Mother  for  worldly  things;  perhaps  he  wanted  Naren 
to  lead  a  life  of  renunciation.  So  he  now  asked  Sri  Ramakrishna  to  do  something 
for  the  family.  The  Master  told  the  disciple  that  it  was  not  Naren’s  destiny 
to  enjoy  a  worldly  life,  but  assured  him  that  the  family  would  be  able  to  eke 
out  a  simple  existence. 

The  above  incident  left  a  deep  impression  upon  Naren’s  mind;  it  enriched 
his  spiritual  life,  for  he  gained  a  new  understanding  of  the  Godhead  and 
Its  ways  in  the  phenomenal  universe.  Naren’s  idea  of  God  had  hitherto  been 
confined  either  to  that  of  a  vague  Impersonal  Reality  or  to  that  of  an  extra- 
cosmic  Creator  removed  from  the  world.  He  now  realized  that  the  Godhead 
is  immanent  in  the  creation,  that  after  projecting  the  universe  from  within 
Itself,  It  has  entered  into  all  created  entities  as  life  and  consciousness,  whether 
manifest  or  latent.  This  same  immanent  Spirit,  or  the  W orld  Soul,  when 
regarded  as  a  person  creating,  preserving,  and  destroying  the  universe,  is  called 
the  Personal  God,  and  is  worshipped  by  different  religions  through  such  a  rela¬ 
tionship  as  that  of  father,  mother,  king,  or  beloved.  These  relationships,  he 
came  to  understand,  have  their  appropriate  symbols,  and  Kali  is  one  of  them. 

Embodying  in  Herself  creation  and  destruction,  love  and  terror,  life  and 
death,  Kali  is  the  symbol  of  the  total  universe.  The  eternal  cycle  of  the  mani¬ 
festation  and  non-manifestation  of  the  universe  is  the  breathing-out  and  breath¬ 
ing-in  of  this  Divine  Mother.  In  one  aspect  She  is  death,  without  which  there 
cannot  be  life.  One  of  Her  hands  is  smeared  with  blood,  since  without  blood  the 
picture  of  the  phenomenal  universe  is  not  complete.  To  the  wicked  who  have 
transgressed  Her  laws,  She  is  the  embodiment  of  terror,  and  to  the  virtuous, 
the  benign  Mother.  Before  creation  She  contains  within  Her  womb  the  seed 
of  the  universe,  which  is  left  from  the  previous  cycle.  After  the  manifestation 
of  the  universe  She  becomes  its  preserver  and  nourisher,  and  at  the  end  of  the 
cycle  She  draws  it  back  within  Herself  and  remains  as  the  undifferentiated 
Sakti,  the  creative  power  of  Brahman.  She  is  non-different  from  Brahman. 
When  free  from  the  acts  of  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction,  the  Spirit, 
in  Its  acosmic  aspect,  is  called  Brahman;  otherwise  It  is  known  as  the  World 
Soul  or  the  Divine  Mother  of  the  universe.  She  is  therefore  the  doorway  to 
the  realization  of  the  Absolute;  She  is  the  Absolute.  To  the  daring  devotee  who 
wants  to  see  the  transcendental  Absolute,  She  reveals  that  form  by  withdrawing 
Her  garment  of  the  phenomenal  universe.  Brahman  is  Her  transcendental  aspect. 
She  is  the  Great  Fact  of  the  universe,  the  totality  of  created  beings.  She  is 
the  Ruler  and  the  Controller. 

All  this  had  previously  been  beyond  Narendra’s  comprehension.  He  had 
accepted  the  reality  of  the  phenomenal  world  and  yet  denied  the  reality  of 
Kali.  He  had  been  conscious  of  hunger  and  thirst,  pain  and  pleasure,  and  the 
other  characteristics  of  the  world,  and  yet  he  had  not  accepted  Kali,  who  con¬ 
trolled  them  all.  That  was  why  he  had  suffered.  But  on  that  auspicious  Tuesday 
evening  the  scales  dropped  from  his  eyes.  He  accepted  Kali  as  the  Divine  Mother 
of  the  universe.  He  became  Her  devotee. 

Many  years  later  he  wrote  to  an  American  lady:  “Kali  worship  is  my  especial 
fad/’  But  he  did  not  preach  Her  in  public,  because  he  thought  that  all  that 


Vivekananda  25 

modern  man  required  was  to  be  found  in  the  Upanishads.  Further,  he  realized 
that  the  Kali  symbol  would  not  be  understood  by  universal  humanity. 

IN  THE  COMPANY  OF  THE  MASTER 

Narendra  enjoyed  the  company  of  the  Master  for  six  years,  during  which 
time  his  spiritual  life  was  moulded.  Sri  Ramakrishna  was  a  wonderful  teacher 
in  every  sense  of  the  word.  Without  imposing  his  ideas  upon  anyone,  he  taught 
more  by  the  silent  influence  of  his  inner  life  than  by  words  or  even  by  personal 
example.  To  live  near  him  demanded  of  the  disciple  purity  of  thought  and 
concentration  of  mind.  He  often  appeared  to  his  future  monastic  followers  as 
their  friend  and  playmate.  Through  fun  and  merriment  he  always  kept  before 
them  the  shining  ideal  of  God-realization.  He  would  not  allow  any  deviation 
from  bodily  and  mental  chastity,  nor  any  compromise  with  truth  and  renuncia¬ 
tion.  Everything  else  he  left  to  the  will  of  the  Divine  Mother. 

Narendra  was  his  “marked’'  disciple,  chosen  by  the  Lord  for  a  special  mission. 
Sri  Ramakrishna  kept  a  sharp  eye  on  him,  though  he  appeared  to  give  the  dis¬ 
ciple  every  opportunity  to  release  his  pent-up  physical  and  mental  energy. 
Before  him,  Naren  often  romped  about  like  a  young  lion  cub  in  the  presence 
of  a  firm  but  indulgent  parent.  His  spiritual  radiance  often  startled  the  Master, 
who  saw  that  maya,  the  Great  Enchantress,  could  not  approach  within  “ten 
feet”  of  that  blazing  fire. 

Narendra  always  came  to  the  Master  in  the  hours  of  his  spiritual  difficulties. 
One  time  he  complained  that  he  could  not  meditate  in  the  morning  on  account 
of  the  shrill  note  of  a  whistle  from  a  neighbouring  mill,  and  was  advised  by 
the  Master  to  concentrate  on  the  very  sound  of  the  whistle.  In  a  short  time  he 
overcame  the  distraction.  Another  time  he  found  it  difficult  to  forget  the  body 
at  the  time  of  meditation.  Sri  Ramakrishna  sharply  pressed  the  space  between 
Naren’s  eyebrows  and  asked  him  to  concentrate  on  that  sensation.  The  disciple 
found  this  method  effective. 

Witnessing  the  religious  ecstasy  of  several  devotees,  Narendra  one  day  said 
to  the  Master  that  he  too  wanted  to  experience  it.  “My  child,”  he  was  told, 
“when  a  huge  elephant  enters  a  small  pond,  a  great  commotion  is  set  up,  but 
when  it  plunges  into  the  Ganges,  the  river  shows  very  little  agitation.  These 
devotees  are  like  small  ponds;  a  little  experience  makes  their  feelings  flow  over 
the  brim.  But  you  are  a  huge  river.” 

Another  day  the  thought  of  excessive  spiritual  fervour  frightened  Naren.  The 
Master  reassured  him  by  saying:  “God  is  like  an  ocean  of  sweetness;  wouldn’t 
you  dive  into  it?  Suppose  there  is  a  bottle,  with  a  wide  mouth,  filled  with 
syrup,  and  that  you  are  a  fly,  hungry  for  the  sweet  liquid.  How  would  you  like 
to  drink  it?”  Narendra  said  that  he  would  sit  on  the  edge  of  the  bottle,  other¬ 
wise  he  might  be  drowned  in  the  syrup  and  lose  his  life.  “But,”  the  Master  said, 
“you  must  not  forget  that  I  am  talking  of  the  Ocean  of  Satchidananda,  the 
Ocean  of  Immortality.  Here  one  need  not  be  afraid  of  death.  Only  fools  say 
that  one  should  not  have  too  much  of  divine  ecstasy.  Can  anybody  carry  to  excess 
the  love  of  God?  You  must  dive  deep  in  the  Ocean  of  God.” 

On  one  occasion  Narendra  and  some  of  his  brother  disciples  were  vehemently 
arguing  about  God’s  nature — whether  He  was  personal  or  impersonal,  whether 


26 


Vivekananda 


Divine  Incarnation  was  fact  or  myth,  and  so  forth  and  so  on.  Narendra  silenced 
his  opponents  by  his  sharp  power  of  reasoning  and  felt  jubilant  at  his  triumph. 
Sri  Ramakrishna  enjoyed  the  discussion  and  after  it  was  over  sang  in  an  ecstatic 
mood: 


How  are  you  trying,  O  my  mind,  to  know  the  nature  of  God? 

You  are  groping  like  a  madman  locked  in  a  dark  room. 

He  is  grasped  through  ecstatic  love;  how  can  you  fathom  Him  without  it? 

Only  through  affirmation,  never  negation,  can  you  know  Him; 

Neither  through  Veda  nor  through  Tantra  nor  the  six  darsanas. 

All  fell  silent,  and  Narendra  realized  the  inability  of  the  intellect  to  fathom 
God's  mystery. 

In  his  heart  of  hearts  Naren  was  a  lover  of  God.  Pointing  to  his  eyes,  Rama¬ 
krishna  said  that  only  a  bhakta  possessed  such  a  tender  look;  the  eyes  of  the 
jnani  were  generally  dry.  Many  a  time,  in  his  later  years,  Narendra  said,  compar¬ 
ing  his  own  spiritual  attitude  with  that  of  the  Master:  “He  was  a  jnani  within, 
but  a  bhakta  without;  but  I  am  a  bhakta  within,  and  a  jnani  without."  He 
meant  that  Ramakrishna's  gigantic  intellect  was  hidden  under  a  thin  layer  of 
devotion,  and  Narendra’s  devotional  nature  was  covered  by  a  cloak  of  knowledge. 

We  have  already  referred  to  the  great  depth  of  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  love  for 
his  beloved  disciple.  He  was  worried  about  the  distress  of  Naren’s  family  and 
one  day  asked  a  wealthy  devotee  if  he  could  not  help  Naren  financially.  Naren’s 
pride  was  wounded  and  he  mildly  scolded  the  Master.  The  latter  said  with  tears 
in  his  eyes:  “O  my  Naren!  I  can  do  anything  for  you,  even  beg  from  door 
to  door."  Narendra  was  deeply  moved  but  said  nothing.  Many  days  after,  he 
remarked,  “The  Master  made  me  his  slave  by  his  love  for  me." 

This  great  love  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  enabled  Naren  to  face  calmly  the  hard¬ 
ships  of  life.  Instead  of  hardening  into  a  cynic,  he  developed  a  mellowness 
of  heart.  But,  as  will  be  seen  later,  Naren  to  the  end  of  his  life  was  often  mis¬ 
understood  by  his  friends.  A  bold  thinker,  he  was  far  ahead  of  his  time.  Once 
he  said:  “Why  should  I  expect  to  be  understood?  It  is  enough  that  they  love  me. 
After  all,  who  am  I?  The  Mother  knows  best.  She  can  do  Her  own  work.  Why 
should  I  think  myself  to  be  indispensable?" 

The  poverty  at  home  was  not  an  altogether  unmitigated  evil.  It  drew  out 
another  side  of  Naren’s  character.  He  began  to  feel  intensely  for  the  needy 
and  afflicted.  Had  he  been  nurtured  in  luxury,  the  Master  used  to  say,  he  would 
perhaps  have  become  a  different  person — a  statesman,  a  lawyer,  an  orator,  or  a 
social  reformer.  But  instead,  he  dedicated  his  life  to  the  service  of  humanity. 

Sri  Ramakrishna  had  had  the  prevision  of  Naren’s  future  life  of  renunciation. 
Therefore  he  was  quite  alarmed  when  he  came  to  know  of  the  various  plans 
made  by  Naren’s  relatives  for  his  marriage.  Prostrating  himself  in  the  shrine 
of  Kali,  he  prayed  repeatedly:  “O  Mother!  Do  break  up  these  plans.  Do  not  let 
him  sink  in  the  quagmire  of  the  world."  He  closely  watched  Naren  and  warned 
him  whenever  he  discovered  the  trace  of  an  impure  thought  in  his  mind. 

Naren’s  keen  mind  understood  the  subtle  implications  of  Sri  Ramakrishna’s 
teachings.  One  day  the  Master  said  that  the  three  salient  disciplines  of  Vaish- 
navism  were  love  of  God’s  name,  service  to  the  devotees,  and  compassion  for 


Vivekananda  27 

all  living  beings.  But  he  did  not  like  the  word  compassion  and  said  to  the 
devotees:  How  foolish  to  speak  of  compassion!  Man  is  an  insignificant  worm 
crawling  on  the  earth — and  he  to  show  compassion  to  others!  This  is  absurd. 
It  must  not  be  compassion,  but  service  to  all.  Recognize  them  as  God’s  mani¬ 
festations  and  serve  them.” 

The  other  devotees  heard  the  words  of  the  Master  but  could  hardly  under¬ 
stand  their  significance.  Naren,  however,  fathomed  the  meaning.  Taking  his 
young  friends  aside,  he  said  that  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  remarks  had  thrown  won¬ 
derful  light  on  the  philosophy  of  non-dualism  with  its  discipline  of  non-attach¬ 
ment,  and  on  that  of  dualism  with  its  discipline  of  love.  The  two  were  not 
really  in  conflict.  A  non-dualist  did  not  have  to  make  his  heart  dry  as  sand,  nor 
did  he  have  to  run  away  from  the  world.  As  Brahman  alone  existed  in  all  men, 
a  non-dualist  must  love  all  and  serve  all.  Love,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word, 
is  not  possible  unless  one  sees  God  in  others.  Naren  said  that  the  Master’s  words 
also  reconciled  the  paths  of  knowledge  and  action.  An  illumined  person  did 
not  have  to  remain  inactive;  he  could  commune  with  Brahman  through  service 
to  other  embodied  beings,  who  also  are  embodiments  of  Brahman. 

“If  it  be  the  will  of  God,”  Naren  concluded,  “I  shall  one  day  proclaim  this 
noble  truth  before  the  world  at  large.  I  shall  make  it  the  common  property 
of  all — the  wise  and  the  fool,  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  brahmin  and  the 
pariah.” 

Years  later  he  expressed  these  sentiments  in  a  noble  poem  which  concluded 
with  the  following  words: 

Thy  God  is  here  before  thee  now. 

Revealed  in  all  these  myriad  forms: 

Rejecting  them,  where  scckest  thou 
His  presence?  He  who  freely  shares 
His  love  with  every  living  thing 
Proffers  true  service  unto  God. 

It  was  Sri  Ramakrishna  who  re-educated  Narendranath  in  the  essentials  of 
Hinduism.  He,  the  fulfilment  of  the  spiritual  aspirations  of  the  three  hundred 
millions  of  Hindus  for  the  past  three  thousand  years,  was  the  embodiment  of 
the  Hindu  faith.  The  beliefs  Narendra  had  learnt  on  his  mother’s  lap  had  been 
shattered  by  a  collegiate  education,  but  the  young  man  now  came  to  know 
that  Hinduism  does  not  consist  of  dogmas  or  creeds;  it  is  an  inner  experience, 
deep  and  inclusive,  which  respects  all  faiths,  all  thoughts,  all  efforts,  and  all 
realizations.  Unity  in  diversity  is  its  ideal. 

Narendra  further  learnt  that  religion  is  a  vision  which,  at  the  end,  transcends 
all  barriers  of  caste  and  race  and  breaks  down  the  limitations  of  time  and  space. 
He  learnt  from  the  Master  that  the  Personal  God  and  worship  through  symbols 
ultimately  lead  the  devotee  to  the  realization  of  complete  oneness  with  the 
Deity.  The  Master  taught  him  the  divinity  of  the  soul,  the  non-duality  of  the 
Godhead,  the  unity  of  existence,  and  the  harmony  of  religions.  He  showed 
Naren  by  his  own  example  how  a  man  in  this  very  life  could  reach  perfection, 
and  the  disciple  found  that  the  Master  had  realized  the  same  God-conscious¬ 
ness  by  following  the  diverse  disciplines  of  Hinduism,  Christianity,  and  Islam. 


28 


Vivekananda 


One  day  the  Master,  in  an  ecstatic  mood,  said  to  the  devotees:  ''There  are 
many  opinions  and  many  ways.  I  have  seen  them  all  and  do  not  like  them 
any  more.  The  devotees  of  different  faiths  quarrel  among  themselves.  Let  me 
tell  you  something.  You  are  my  own  people.  There  are  no  strangers  around. 
I  clearly  see  that  God  is  the  whole  and  I  am  a  part  of  Him.  He  is  the  Lord 
and  I  am  His  servant.  And  sometimes  I  think  He  is  I  and  I  am  He/' 

Narendra  regarded  Sri  Ramakrishna  as  the  embodiment  of  the  spirit  of 
religion  and  did  not  bother  to  know  whether  or  not  he  was  an  Incarnation  of 
God.  He  was  reluctant  to  cast  the  Master  in  any  theological  mould.  It  was 
enough  for  Naren  if  he  could  see  through  the  vista  of  Ramakrishna’s  spiritual 
experiences  all  the  aspects  of  the  Godhead. 

How  did  Narendra  impress  the  other  devotees  of  the  Master,  especially  the 
youngsters?  He  was  their  idol.  They  were  awed  by  his  intellect  and  fascinated  by 
his  personality.  In  appearance  he  was  a  dynamic  youth,  overflowing  with  vigour 
and  vitality,  having  a  physical  frame  slightly  over  middle  height  and  somewhat 
thickset  in  the  shoulders.  He  was  graceful  without  being  feminine.  He  had  a 
strong  jaw,  suggesting  his  staunch  will  and  fixed  determination.  The  chest  was 
expansive,  and  the  breadth  of  the  head  towards  the  front  signified  high  mental 
power  and  development.  But  the  most  remarkable  thing  about  him  was  his  eyes, 
which  Sri  Ramakrishna  compared  to  lotus  petals.  They  were  prominent  but  not 
protruding,  and  part  of  the  time  their  gaze  was  indrawn,  suggesting  the  habit 
of  deep  meditation;  their  colour  varied  according  to  the  feeling  of  the  moment. 
Sometimes  they  would  be  luminous  in  profundity,  and  sometimes  they  sparkled 
in  merriment.  Endowed  with  the  native  grace  of  an  animal,  he  was  free  in  his 
movements.  He  walked  sometimes  with  a  slow  gait  and  sometimes  with  rapid¬ 
ity,  always  a  part  of  his  mind  absorbed  in  deep  thought.  And  it  was  a  delight 
to  hear  his  resonant  voice,  either  in  conversation  or  in  music. 

But  when  Naren  was  serious  his  face  often  frightened  his  friends.  In  a  heated 
discussion  his  eyes  glowed.  If  immersed  in  his  own  thoughts,  he  created  such 
an  air  of  aloofness  that  no  one  dared  to  approach  him.  Subject  to  various  moods, 
sometimes  he  showed  utter  impatience  with  his  environment,  and  sometimes 
a  tenderness  that  melted  everybody’s  heart.  His  smile  was  bright  and  infectious. 
To  some  he  was  a  happy  dreamer,  to  some  he  lived  in  a  real  world  rich  with 
love  and  beauty,  but  to  all  he  unfailingly  appeared  a  scion  of  an  aristocratic 
home. 

And  how  did  the  Master  regard  his  beloved  disciple?  To  quote  his  own  words: 

“Narendra  belongs  to  a  very  high  plane — the  realm  of  the  Absolute.  He 
has  a  manly  nature.  So  many  devotees  come  here,  but  there  is  no  one  like  him. 

“Every  now  and  then  I  take  stock  of  the  devotees.  I  find  that  some  are  like 
lotuses  with  ten  petals,  some  like  lotuses  with  a  hundred  petals.  But  among 
lotuses  Narendra  is  a  thousand-petalled  one. 

“Other  devotees  may  be  like  pots  or  pitchers;  but  Narendra  is  a  huge  water- 
barrel. 

“Others  may  be  like  pools  or  tanks;  but  Narendra  is  a  huge  reservoir  like  the 
Haldarpukur. 

“Among  fish,  Narendra  is  a  huge  red-eyed  carp;  others  are  like  minnows  or 
smelts  or  sardines. 


The  Temple  of  Kali  at  Dakshineswar 


Sri  Ramakrishna 


The  Holy  Mother 


The  Cossipore  Garden  House 


Vivekananda  29 

“Narendra  is  a  Very  big  receptacle/  one  that  can  hold  many  things.  He  is 
like  a  bamboo  with  a  big  hollow  space  inside. 

“Narendra  is  not  under  the  control  of  anything.  He  is  not  under  the  control 
of  attachment  or  sense  pleasures.  He  is  like  a  male  pigeon.  If  you  hold  a  male 
pigeon  by  its  beak,  it  breaks  away  from  you;  but  the  female  pigeon  keeps  still. 
1  feel  great  strength  when  Narendra  is  with  me  in  a  gathering/' 

ramakrishna’s  illness  and  death 

Sometime  about  the  middle  of  1885  Sri  Ramakrishna  showed  the  first  symp¬ 
toms  of  a  throat  ailment  that  later  was  diagnosed  as  cancer.  Against  the  advice 
of  the  physicians,  he  continued  to  give  instruction  to  spiritual  seekers,  and  to 
fall  into  frequent  trances.  Both  of  these  practices  aggravated  the  illness.  For 
the  convenience  of  the  physicians  and  the  devotees,  he  was  at  first  removed 
to  a  house  in  the  northern  section  of  Calcutta  and  then  to  a  garden  house 
at  Cossipore,  a  suburb  of  the  city.  Narendra  and  the  other  young  disciples  took 
charge  of  nursing  him.  Disregarding  the  wishes  of  their  guardians,  the  boys  gave 
up  their  studies  or  neglected  their  duties  at  home,  at  least  temporarily,  in  order 
to  devote  themselves  heart  and  soul  to  the  service  of  the  Master.  His  wife, 
known  among  the  devotees  as  the  Holy  Mother,  looked  after  the  cooking;  the 
older  devotees  met  the  expenses.  All  regarded  this  service  to  the  guru  as  a 
blessing  and  privilege. 

Narendra  time  and  again  showed  his  keen  insight  and  mature  judgement 
during  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  illness.  Many  of  the  devotees,  who  looked  upon  the 
Master  as  God’s  Incarnation  and  therefore  refused  to  see  in  him  any  human 
frailty,  began  to  give  a  supernatural  interpretation  of  his  illness.  They  believed 
that  it  had  been  brought  about  by  the  will  of  the  Divine  Mother  or  the  Master 
himself  to  fulfil  an  inscrutable  purpose,  and  that  it  would  be  cured  without  any 
human  effort  after  the  purpose  was  fulfilled.  Narendra  said,  however,  that  since 
Sri  Ramakrishna  was  a  combination  of  God  and  man  the  physical  element  in 
him  was  subject  to  such  laws  of  nature  as  birth,  growth,  decay,  and  destruction. 
He  refused  to  give  the  Master's  disease,  a  natural  phenomenon,  any  supernatural 
explanation.  Nonetheless,  he  was  willing  to  shed  his  last  drop  of  blood  in  the 
service  of  Sri  Ramakrishna. 

Emotion  plays  an  important  part  in  the  development  of  the  spiritual  life. 
While  intellect  removes  the  obstacles,  it  is  emotion  that  gives  the  urge  to  the 
seeker  to  move  forward.  But  mere  emotionalism  without  the  disciplines  of  dis¬ 
crimination  and  renunciation  often  leads  him  astray.  He  often  uses  it  as  a  short¬ 
cut  to  trance  or  ecstasy.  Sri  Ramakrishna,  no  doubt,  danced  and  wept  while 
singing  God’s  name  and  experienced  frequent  trances;  but  behind  his  emo¬ 
tion  there  was  the  long  practice  of  austerities  and  renunciation.  His  devotees 
had  not  witnessed  the  practice  of  his  spiritual  disciplines.  Some  of  them, 
especially  the  elderly  householders,  began  to  display  ecstasies  accompanied  by 
tears  and  physical  contortions,  which  in  many  cases,  as  later  appeared,  were 
the  result  of  careful  rehearsal  at  home  or  mere  imitation  of  Sri  Ramakrishna’s 
genuine  trances.  Some  of  the  devotees,  who  looked  upon  the  Master  as  a  Divine 
Incarnation,  thought  that  he  had  assumed  their  responsibilities,  and  therefore 
they  relaxed  their  own  efforts.  Others  began  to  speculate  about  the  part  each 


30 


Vivekananda 


of  them  was  destined  to  play  in  the  new  dispensation  of  Sri  Ramakrishna.  In 
short,  those  who  showed  the  highest  emotionalism  posed  as  the  most  spiritually 
advanced. 

Narendra’s  alert  mind  soon  saw  this  dangerous  trend  in  their  lives.  He  began 
to  make  fun  of  the  elders  and  warned  his  young  brother  disciples  about  the 
harmful  effect  of  indulging  in  such  outbursts.  Real  spirituality,  he  told  them 
over  and  over  again,  was  the  eradication  of  worldly  tendencies  and  the  devel¬ 
opment  of  man's  higher  nature.  He  derided  their  tears  and  trances  as  symptoms 
of  nervous  disorder,  which  should  be  corrected  by  the  power  of  the  will,  and, 
if  necessary,  by  nourishing  food  and  proper  medical  treatment.  Very  often,  he 
said,  unwary  devotees  of  God  fall  victims  to  mental  and  physical  breakdown. 
“Of  one  hundred  persons  who  take  up  the  spiritual  life,”  he  grimly  warned, 
“eighty  turn  out  to  be  charlatans,  fifteen  insane,  and  only  five,  maybe,  get  a 
glimpse  of  the  real  truth.  Therefore,  beware.”  He  appealed  to  their  inner 
strength  and  admonished  them  to  keep  away  from  all  sentimental  nonsense. 
He  described  to  the  young  disciples  Sri  Ramakrislma’s  uncompromising  self- 
control,  passionate  yearning  for  God,  and  utter  renunciation  of  attachment  to 
the  world,  and  he  insisted  that  those  who  loved  the  Master  should  apply  his 
teachings  in  their  lives.  Sri  Ramakrishna,  too,  coming  to  realize  the  approaching 
end  of  his  mortal  existence,  impressed  it  upon  the  devotees  that  the  realization 
of  God  depended  upon  the  giving  up  of  lust  and  greed.  The  young  disciples 
became  grateful  to  Narendranath  for  thus  guiding  them  during  the  formative 
period  of  their  spiritual  career.  They  spent  their  leisure  hours  together  in  medi¬ 
tation,  study,  devotional  music,  and  healthy  spiritual  discussions. 

The  illness  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  showed  no  sign  of  abatement;  the  boys 
redoubled  their  efforts  to  nurse  him,  and  Narendra  was  constantly  by  their  side, 
cheering  them  whenever  they  felt  depressed.  One  day  he  found  them  hesitant 
about  approaching  the  Master.  They  had  been  told  that  the  illness  was  infec¬ 
tious.  Narendra  dragged  them  to  the  Master’s  room.  Lying  in  a  corner  was  a 
cup  containing  part  of  the  gruel  which  Sri  Ramakrishna  could  not  swallow.  It 
was  mixed  with  his  saliva.  Narendra  seized  the  cup  and  swallowed  its  contents. 
This  set  at  rest  the  boys'  misgivings. 

Narendra,  understanding  the  fatal  nature  of  Sri  Ramakrishna's  illness  and 
realizing  that  the  beloved  teacher  would  not  live  long,  intensified  his  own 
spiritual  practices.  His  longing  for  the  vision  of  God  knew  no  limit.  One  day 
he  asked  the  Master  for  the  boon  of  remaining  merged  in  samadhi  three  or  four 
days  at  a  stretch,  interrupting  his  meditation  now  and  then  for  a  bite  of  food. 
“You  are  a  fool,”  said  the  Master.  “There  is  a  state  higher  than  that.  It  is  you 
who  sing:  ‘O  Lord!  Thou  art  all  that  exists.’  ”  Sri  Ramakrishna  wanted  the 
disciple  to  see  God  in  all  beings  and  to  serve  them  in  a  spirit  of  worship.  He 
often  said  that  to  see  the  world  alone,  without  God,  is  ignorance,  ajnana;  to 
see  God  alone,  without  the  world,  is  a  kind  of  philosophical  knowledge,  jnana; 
but  to  see  all  beings  permeated  by  the  spirit  of  God  is  supreme  wisdom,  vijnana. 
Only  a  few  blessed  souls  could  see  God  dwelling  in  all.  He  wanted  Narcn  to 
attain  this  supreme  wisdom.  So  the  Master  said  to  him,  “Settle  your  family 
affairs  first,  then  you  shall  know  a  state  even  higher  than  samadhi.” 

On  another  occasion,  in  response  to  a  similar  request,  Sri  Ramakrishna  said  to 


Vivekananda 


31 


Naren:  Shame  on  you!  You  are  asking  for  such  an  insignificant  thing.  I  thought 
that  you  would  be  like  a  big  banyan  tree,  and  that  thousands  of  people  would 
rest  in  your  shade.  But  now  I  see  that  you  are  seeking  your  own  liberation. ” 
Thus  scolded,  Narendra  shed  profuse  tears.  He  realized  the  greatness  of  Sri 
Ramakrishna’s  heart. 

An  intense  fire  was  raging  within  Narendra’s  soul.  He  could  hardly  touch  his 
college  books;  he  felt  it  was  a  dreadful  thing  to  waste  time  in  that  way.  One 
morning  he  went  home  but  suddenly  experienced  an  inner  fear.  He  wept  for 
not  having  made  much  spiritual  progress,  and  hurried  to  Cossipore  almost 
unconscious  of  the  outside  world.  His  shoes  slipped  off  somewhere,  and  as  he 
ran  past  a  rick  of  straw  some  of  it  stuck  to  his  clothes.  Only  after  entering  the 
Master’s  room  did  he  feel  some  inner  peace. 

Sri  Ramakrishna  said  to  the  other  disciples  present:  “Look  at  Naren’s  state 
of  mind.  Previously  he  did  not  believe  in  the  Personal  God  or  divine  forms. 
Now  he  is  dying  for  God’s  vision.”  The  Master  then  gave  Naren  certain  spiritual 
instructions  about  meditation. 

Naren  was  being  literally  consumed  by  a  passion  for  God.  The  world  ap¬ 
peared  to  him  to  be  utterly  distasteful.  When  the  Master  reminded  him  of 
his  college  studies,  the  disciple  said,  “I  would  feel  relieved  if  I  could  swallow  a 
drug  and  forget  all  I  have  learnt.”  He  spent  night  after  night  in  meditation 
under  the  trees  in  the  Panchavati  at  Dakshineswar,  where  Sri  Ramakrishna, 
during  the  days  of  his  spiritual  discipline,  had  contemplated  God.  He  felt  the 
awakening  of  the  Kundalini2  and  had  other  spiritual  visions. 

One  day  at  Cossipore  Narendra  was  meditating  under  a  tree  with  Girish, 
another  disciple.  The  place  was  infested  with  mosquitoes.  Girish  tried  in  vain 
to  concentrate  his  mind.  Casting  his  eyes  on  Naren,  he  saw  him  absorbed  in 
meditation,  though  his  body  appeared  to  be  covered  by  a  blanket  of  the  insects. 

A  few  days  later  Narendra’s  longing  seemed  to  have  reached  the  breaking- 
point.  He  spent  an  entire  night  walking  around  the  garden  house  at  Cossipore 
and  repeating  Rama’s  name  in  a  heart-rending  manner.  In  the  early  hours  of 
the  morning  Sri  Ramakrishna  heard  his  voice,  called  him  to  his  side,  and  said 
affectionately:  “Listen,  my  child,  why  are  you  acting  that  way?  What  will  you 
achieve  by  such  impatience?”  He  stopped  for  a  minute  and  then  continued: 
“See,  Naren.  What  you  have  been  doing  now,  I  did  for  twelve  long  years.  A 
storm  raged  in  my  head  during  that  period.  What  will  you  realize  in  one  night?” 

But  the  master  was  pleased  with  Naren’s  spiritual  struggle  and  made  no 
secret  of  his  wish  to  make  him  his  spiritual  heir.  He  wanted  Naren  to  look 
after  the  young  disciples.  “I  leave  them  in  your  care,”  he  said  to  him.  “Love 
them  intensely  and  see  that  they  practise  spiritual  disciplines  even  after  my 
death,  and  that  they  do  not  return  home.”  He  asked  the  young  disciples  to  regard 
Naren  as  their  leader.  It  was  an  easy  task  for  them.  Then,  one  day,  Sri  Rama¬ 
krishna  initiated  several  of  the  young  disciples  into  the  monastic  life,  and  thus 
himself  laid  the  foundation  of  the  future  Ramakrishna  Order  of  monks. 

Attendance  on  the  Master  during  his  sickness  revealed  to  Narendra  the  true 
import  of  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  spiritual  experiences.  He  was  amazed  to  find  that 

2  The  spiritual  energy,  usually  dormant  in  man,  but  aroused  by  the  practice  of  spiritual 
disciplines.  See  glossary. 


32 


Vivekananda 


the  Master  could  dissociate  himself  from  all  consciousness  of  the  body  by  a 
mere  wish,  at  which  time  he  was  not  aware  of  the  least  pain  from  his  ailment. 
Constantly  he  enjoyed  an  inner  bliss,  in  spite  of  the  suffering  of  the  body, 
and  he  could  transmit  that  bliss  to  the  disciples  by  a  mere  touch  or  look.  To 
Narendta,  Sri  Ramakrishna  was  the  vivid  demonstration  of  the  reality  of  the 
Spirit  and  the  unsubstantiality  of  matter. 

One  day  the  Master  was  told  by  a  scholar  that  he  could  instantly  cure  him¬ 
self  of  his  illness  by  concentrating  his  mind  on  his  throat.  This  Sri  Ramakrishna 
refused  to  do  since  he  could  never  withdraw  his  mind  from  God.  But  at  Naren’s 
repeated  request,  the  Master  agreed  to  speak  to  the  Divine  Mother  about  his 
illness.  A  little  later  he  said  to  the  disciple  in  a  sad  voice:  “Yes,  I  told  Her 
that  I  could  not  swallow  any  food  on  account  of  the  sore  in  my  throat,  and 
asked  Her  to  do  something  about  it.  But  the  Mother  said,  pointing  to  you  all, 
AVhy,  are  you  not  eating  enough  through  all  these  mouths?'  I  felt  so  humili¬ 
ated  that  I  could  not  utter  another  word."  Narendra  realized  how  Sri  Rama¬ 
krishna  applied  in  life  the  Vedantic  idea  of  the  oneness  of  existence  and  also 
came  to  know  that  only  through  such  realization  could  one  rise  above  the  pain 
and  suffering  of  the  individual  life. 

To  live  with  Sri  Ramakrishna  during  his  illness  was  in  itself  a  spiritual  experi¬ 
ence.  It  was  wonderful  to  witness  how  he  bore  with  his  pain.  In  one  mood  he 
would  see  that  the  Divine  Mother  alone  was  the  dispenser  of  pleasure  and  pain 
and  that  his  own  will  was  one  with  the  Mother’s  will,  and  in  another  mood  he 
would  clearly  behold  the  utter  absence  of  diversity,  God  alone  becoming  men, 
animals,  gardens,  houses,  roads,  “the  executioner,  the  victim,  and  the  slaughter- 
post,"  to  use  the  Master’s  own  words. 

Narendra  saw  in  the  Master  the  living  explanation  of  the  scriptures  regarding 
the  divine  nature  of  the  soul  and  the  illusoriness  of  the  body.  Further,  he 
came  to  know  that  Sri  Ramakrishna  had  attained  to  that  state  by  the  total 
renunciation  of  “woman"  and  “gold,"  which,  indeed,  was  the  gist  of  his 
teaching.  Another  idea  was  creeping  into  Naren’s  mind.  He  began  to  see  how 
the  transcendental  Reality,  the  Godhead,  could  embody  Itself  as  the  Personal 
God,  and  the  Absolute  become  a  Divine  Incarnation.  He  was  having  a  glimpse 
of  the  greatest  of  all  divine  mysteries:  the  incarnation  of  the  Father  as  the  Son 
for  the  redemption  of  the  world.  He  began  to  believe  that  God  becomes  man 
so  that  man  may  become  God.  Sri  Ramakrishna  thus  appeared  to  him  in  a 
new  light. 

Under  the  intellectual  leadership  of  Narendranath,  the  Cossipore  garden 
house  became  a  miniature  university.  During  the  few  moments’  leisure  snatched 
from  nursing  and  meditation,  Narendra  would  discuss  with  his  brother  disciples 
religions  and  philosophies,  both  Eastern  and  Western.  Along  with  the  teach¬ 
ings  of  Sankara,  Krishna,  and  Chaitanya,  those  of  Buddha  and  Christ  were 
searchingly  examined. 

Narendra  had  a  special  affection  for  Buddha,  and  one  day  suddenly  felt  a  strong 
desire  to  visit  Bodh-Gaya,  where  the  great  Prophet  had  attained  enlightenment. 
With  Kali  and  Tarak,  two  of  the  brother  disciples,  he  left,  unbeknown  to  the 
others,  for  that  sacred  place  and  meditated  for  long  hours  under  the  sacred 
Bo-tree.  Once  while  thus  absorbed  he  was  overwhelmed  with  emotion  and, 


Vivekananda  33 

weeping  profusely,  embraced  Tarak.  Explaining  the  incident,  he  said  afterwards 
that  during  the  meditation  he  keenly  felt  the  presence  of  Buddha  and  saw 
vividly  how  the  history  of  India  had  been  changed  by  his  noble  teachings; 
pondering  all  this  he  could  not  control  his  emotion. 

Back  in  Cossipore,  Narendra  described  enthusiastically  to  the  Master  and 
the  brother  disciples  Buddha's  life,  experiences,  and  teachings.  Sri  Ramakrishna 
in  turn  related  some  of  his  own  experiences.  Narendra  had  to  admit  that  the 
Master,  after  the  attainment  of  the  highest  spiritual  realization,  had  of  his  own 
will  kept  his  mind  on  the  plane  of  simplicity. 

He  further  understood  that  a  coin,  however  valuable,  which  belonged  to  an 
older  period  of  history,  could  not  be  used  as  currency  at  a  later  date.  God 
assumes  different  forms  in  different  ages  to  serve  the  special  needs  of  the  time. 

Narendra  practised  spiritual  disciplines  with  unabating  intensity.  Sometimes 
he  felt  an  awakening  of  a  spiritual  power  that  he  could  transmit  to  others. 
One  night  in  March  1886,  he  asked  his  brother  disciple  Kali  to  touch  his  right 
knee,  and  then  entered  into  deep  meditation.  Kali’s  hand  began  to  tremble; 
he  felt  a  kind  of  electric  shock.  Afterwards  Narendra  was  rebuked  by  the 
Master  for  frittering  away  spiritual  powers  before  accumulating  them  in  suffi¬ 
cient  measure.  He  was  further  told  that  he  had  injured  Kali’s  spiritual  growth, 
which  had  been  following  the  path  of  dualistic  devotion,  by  forcing  upon  the 
latter  some  of  his  own  non-dualistic  ideas.  The  Master  added,  however,  that 
the  damage  was  not  serious. 

Narendra  had  had  enough  of  visions  and  manifestations  of  spiritual  powers, 
and  he  now  wearied  of  them.  His  mind  longed  for  the  highest  experience  of 
non-dualistic  Vedanta,  the  nirvikalpa  samadhi,  in  which  the  names  and  forms 
of  the  phenomenal  world  disappear  and  the  aspirant  realizes  total  non-difference 
between  the  individual  soul,  the  universe,  and  Brahman,  or  the  Absolute.  He 
told  Sri  Ramakrishna  about  it,  but  the  master  remained  silent.  And  yet  one 
evening  the  experience  came  to  him  quite  unexpectedly. 

He  was  absorbed  in  his  usual  meditation  when  he  suddenly  felt  as  if  a  lamp 
were  burning  at  the  back  of  his  head.  The  light  glowed  more  and  more  intensely 
and  finally  burst.  Narendra  was  overwhelmed  by  that  light  and  fell  unconscious. 
After  some  time,  as  he  began  to  regain  his  normal  mood,  he  could  feel  only 
his  head  and  not  the  rest  of  his  body. 

In  an  agitated  voice  he  said  to  Gopal,  a  brother  disciple  who  was  meditating 
in  the  same  room,  “Where  is  my  body?” 

Gopal  answered:  “Why,  Naren,  it  is  there.  Don’t  you  feel  it?” 

Gopal  was  afraid  that  Narendra  was  dying,  and  ran  to  Sri  Ramakrishna’s 
room.  He  found  the  Master  in  a  calm  but  serious  mood,  evidently  aware  of 
what  had  happened  in  the  room  downstairs.  After  listening  to  Gopal  the  Master 
said,  “Let  him  stay  in  that  state  for  a  while;  he  has  teased  me  long  enough 
for  it.” 

For  a  long  time  Narendra  remained  unconscious,  and  when  he  regained  his 
normal  state  of  mind  he  was  bathed  in  an  ineffable  peace.  As  he  entered  Sri 
Ramakrishna’s  room  the  latter  said:  “Now  the  Mother  has  shown  you  every¬ 
thing.  But  this  realization,  like  the  jewel  locked  in  a  box,  will  be  hidden  away 
from  you  and  kept  in  my  custody.  I  will  keep  the  key  with  me.  Only  after  you 


34 


Vivekananda 


have  fulfilled  your  mission  on  this  earth  will  the  box  be  unlocked,  and  you 
will  know  everything  as  you  have  known  now/’ 

The  experience  of  this  kind  of  samadhi  usually  has  a  most  devastating  effect 
upon  the  body;  Incarnations  and  special  messengers  of  God  alone  can  survive 
its  impact.  By  way  of  advice,  Sri  Ramakrishna  asked  Naren  to  use  great  dis¬ 
crimination  about  his  food  and  companions,  only  accepting  the  purest. 

Later  the  Master  said  to  the  other  disciples:  “Narendra  will  give  up  his  body 
of  his  own  will.  When  he  realizes  his  true  nature,  he  will  refuse  to  stay  on  this 
earth.  Very  soon  he  will  shake  the  world  by  his  intellectual  and  spiritual  powers. 
I  have  prayed  to  the  Divine  Mother  to  keep  away  from  him  the  Knowledge  of 
the  Absolute  and  cover  his  eyes  with  a  veil  of  maya.  There  is  much  work  to  be 
done  by  him.  But  the  veil,  I  see,  is  so  thin  that  it  may  be  rent  at  any  time.” 

Sri  Ramakrishna,  the  Avatar  of  the  modern  age,  was  too  gentle  and  tender 
to  labour,  himself,  for  humanity’s  welfare.  He  needed  some  sturdy  souls  to  carry 
on  his  work.  Narendra  was  foremost  among  those  around  him;  therefore  Sri 
Ramakrishna  did  not  want  him  to  remain  immersed  in  nirvikalpa  samadhi 
before  his  task  in  this  world  was  finished. 

The  disciples  sadly  watched  the  gradual  wasting  away  of  Sri  Ramakrishna’s 
physical  frame.  His  body  became  a  mere  skeleton  covered  with  skin;  the  suf¬ 
fering  was  intense.  But  he  devoted  his  remaining  energies  to  the  training  of 
the  disciples,  especially  Narendra.  He  had  been  relieved  of  his  worries  about 
Narendra;  for  the  disciple  now  admitted  the  divinity  of  Kali,  whose  will  con¬ 
trols  all  things  in  the  universe.  Naren  said  later  on:  “From  the  time  he  gave 
me  over  to  the  Divine  Mother,  he  retained  the  vigour  of  his  body  only  for  six 
months.  The  rest  of  the  time — and  that  was  two  long  years — he  suffered.” 

One  day  the  Master,  unable  to  speak  even  in  a  whisper,  wrote  on  a  piece  of 
paper:  “Narendra  will  teach  others.”  The  disciple  demurred.  Sri  Ramakrishna 
replied:  “But  you  must.  Your  very  bones  will  do  it.”  He  further  said  that  all  the 
supernatural  powers  he  had  acquired  would  work  through  his  beloved  disciple. 

A  short  while  before  the  curtain  finally  fell  on  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  earthly  life, 
the  Master  one  day  called  Naren  to  his  bedside.  Gazing  intently  upon  him, 
he  passed  into  deep  meditation.  Naren  felt  that  a  subtle  force,  resembling  an 
electric  current,  was  entering  his  body.  He  gradually  lost  outer  consciousness. 
After  some  time  he  regained  knowledge  of  the  physical  world  and  found  the 
Master  weeping.  Sri  Ramakrishna  said  to  him:  “O  Naren,  today  I  have  given 
you  everything  I  possess — now  I  am  no  more  than  a  fakir,  a  penniless  beggar. 
By  the  powers  I  have  transmitted  to  you,  you  will  accomplish  great  things  in 
the  world,  and  not  until  then  will  you  return  to  the  source  whence  you  have 
come.” 

Narendra  from  that  day  became  the  channel  of  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  powers  and 
the  spokesman  of  his  message. 

Two  days  before  the  dissolution  of  the  Master’s  body,  Narendra  was  standing 
by  the  latter’s  bedside  when  a  strange  thought  flashed  into  his  mind:  Was  the 
Master  truly  an  Incarnation  of  God?  He  said  to  himself  that  he  would  accept 
Sri  Ramakrishna’s  divinity  if  the  Master,  on  the  threshold  of  death,  declared 
himself  to  be  an  Incarnation.  But  this  was  only  a  passing  thought.  He  stood 


Vivekananda 


35 


looking  intently  at  the  Master’s  face.  Slowly  §ri  Ramakrishna’s  lips  parted  and 
he  said  in  a  clear  voice:  “O  my  Naren,  are  you  still  not  convinced?  He  who  in 
the  past  was  born  as  Rama  and  Krishna  is  now  living  in  this  very  body  as 
Ramakrishna — but  not  from  the  standpoint  of  your  Vedanta.”  Thus  Sri  Rama- 
krishna,  in  answer  to  Narendra’s  mental  query,  put  himself  in  the  category  of 
Rama  and  Krishna,  who  are  recognized  by  orthodox  Hindus  as  two  of  the 
Avatars,  or  Incarnations  of  God. 

A  few  words  may  be  said  here  about  the  meaning  of  the  Incarnation  in  the 
Hindu  religious  tradition.  One  of  the  main  doctrines  of  Vedanta  is  the  divinity 
of  the  soul:  every  soul,  in  reality,  is  Brahman.  Thus  it  may  be  presumed  that 
there  is  no  difference  between  an  Incarnation  and  an  ordinary  man.  To  be  sure, 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  Absolute,  or  Brahman,  no  such  difference  exists. 
But  from  the  relative  standpoint,  where  multiplicity  is  perceived,  a  difference 
must  be  admitted.  Embodied  human  beings  reflect  godliness  in  varying  measure. 
In  an  Incarnation  this  godliness  is  fully  manifest.  Therefore  an  Incarnation  is 
unlike  an  ordinary  mortal  or  even  an  illumined  saint.  To  give  an  illustration: 
There  is  no  difference  between  a  clay  lion  and  a  clay  mouse,  from  the  stand¬ 
point  of  the  clay.  Both  become  the  same  substance  when  dissolved  into  clay. 
But  the  difference  between  the  lion  and  the  mouse,  from  the  standpoint  of 
form,  is  clearly  seen.  Likewise,  as  Brahman,  an  ordinary  man  is  identical  with 
an  Incarnation.  Both  become  the  same  Brahman  when  they  attain  final  illu¬ 
mination.  But  in  the  relative  state  of  name  and  form,  which  is  admitted  by 
Vedanta,  the  difference  between  them  is  accepted.  According  to  the  Bhagavad 
Gita  (IV.  6-8),  Brahman  in  times  of  spiritual  crisis  assumes  a  human  body 
through  Its  own  inscrutable  power,  called  maya.  Though  birthless,  immutable, 
and  the  Lord  of  all  beings,  yet  in  every  age  Brahman  appears  to  be  incarnated  in 
a  human  body  for  the  protection  of  the  good  and  the  destruction  of  the  wicked. 

As  noted  above,  the  Incarnation  is  quite  different  from  an  ordinary  man, 
even  from  a  saint.  Among  the  many  vital  differences  may  be  mentioned  the 
fact  that  the  birth  of  an  ordinary  mortal  is  governed  by  the  law  of  karma, 
whereas  that  of  an  Incarnation  is  a  voluntary  act  undertaken  for  the  spiritual 
redemption  of  the  world.  Further,  though  maya  is  the  cause  of  the  embodiment 
of  both  an  ordinary  mortal  and  an  Incarnation,  yet  the  former  is  fully  under 
maya’s  control,  whereas  the  latter  always  remains  its  master.  A  man,  though 
potentially  Brahman,  is  not  conscious  of  his  divinity;  but  an  Incarnation  is 
fully  aware  of  the  true  nature  of  His  birth  and  mission.  The  spiritual  disciplines 
practised  by  an  Incarnation  are  not  for  His  own  liberation,  but  for  the  welfare 
of  humanity;  as  far  as  He  is  concerned,  such  terms  as  bondage  and  liberation 
have  no  meaning,  He  being  ever  free,  ever  pure,  and  ever  illumined.  Lastly,  an 
Incarnation  can  bestow  upon  others  the  boon  of  liberation,  whereas  even  an 
illumined  saint  is  devoid  of  such  power. 

Thus  the  Master,  on  his  death-bed,  proclaimed  himself  through  his  own 
words  as  the  Incarnation  or  God-man  of  modern  times. 

On  August  15,  1886,  the  Master’s  suffering  became  almost  unbearable.  At 
midnight  he  summoned  Naren  to  his  bedside  and  gave  him  the  last  instructions, 
almost  in  a  whisper.  The  disciples  stood  around  him.  At  two  minutes  past  one 


36 


Vivekananda 


in  the  early  morning,  Sri  Ramakrishna  uttered  three  times  in  a  ringing  voice 
the  name  of  his  beloved  Kali  and  entered  into  the  final  samadhi,  from  which 
his  mind  never  again  returned  to  the  physical  world. 

The  body  was  given  to  the  fire  in  the  neighbouring  cremation  ground  on  the 
bank  of  the  Ganges.  But  to  the  Holy  Mother,  as  she  was  putting  on  the  signs 
of  a  Hindu  widow,  there  came  these  words  of  faith  and  reassurance:  “I  am  not 
dead.  I  have  just  moved  from  one  room  to  another.” 

As  the  disciples  returned  from  the  cremation  ground  to  the  garden  house, 
they  felt  great  desolation.  Sri  Ramakrishna  had  been  more  than  their  earthly 
father.  His  teachings  and  companionship  still  inspired  them.  They  felt  his 
presence  in  his  room.  His  words  rang  in  their  ears.  But  they  could  no  longer 
see  his  physical  body  or  enjoy  his  seraphic  smile.  They  all  yearned  to  commune 
with  him. 

Within  a  week  of  the  Master’s  passing  away,  Narendra  one  night  was  strolling 
in  the  garden  with  a  brother  disciple,  when  he  saw  in  front  of  him  a  luminous 
figure.  There  was  no  mistaking:  it  was  Sri  Ramakrishna  himself.  Narendra 
remained  silent,  regarding  the  phenomenon  as  an  illusion.  But  his  brother 
disciple  exclaimed  in  wonder,  “See,  Naren!  See!”  There  was  no  room  for  further 
doubt.  Narendra  was  convinced  that  it  was  Sri  Ramakrishna  who  had  appeared 
in  a  luminous  body.  As  he  called  to  the  other  brother  disciples  to  behold  the 
Master,  the  figure  disappeared. 

THE  BARANAGORE  MONASTERY 

Among  the  Master’s  disciples,  Tarak,  Latu,  and  the  elder  Gopal  had  already 
cut  off  their  relationship  with  their  families.  The  young  disciples  whom  Sri 
Ramakrishna  had  destined  for  the  monastic  life  were  in  need  of  a  shelter.  The 
Master  had  asked  Naren  to  see  to  it  that  they  should  not  become  householders. 
Naren  vividly  remembered  the  Master’s  dying  words:  “Naren,  take  care  of  the 
boys.”  The  householder  devotees,  moreover,  wanted  to  meet,  from  time  to  time, 
at  a  place  where  they  could  talk  about  the  Master.  They  longed  for  the  com¬ 
pany  of  the  young  disciples  who  had  renounced  the  world  and  totally  dedicated 
their  lives  to  the  realization  of  God.  But  who  would  bear  the  expenses  of  a 
house  where  the  young  disciples  could  live?  How  would  they  be  provided  with 
food  and  the  basic  necessaries  of  life? 

All  these  problems  were  solved  by  the  generosity  of  Surendranath  Mitra,  the 
beloved  householder  disciple  of  Sri  Ramakrishna.  He  came  forward  to  pay  the 
expenses  of  new  quarters  for  the  Master’s  homeless  disciples.  A  house  was 
rented  at  Baranagore,  midway  between  Calcutta  and  Dakshineswar.  Dreary  and 
dilapidated,  it  was  a  building  that  had  the  reputation  of  being  haunted  by  evil 
spirits.  The  young  disciples  were  happy  to  take  refuge  in  it  from  the  turmoil 
of  Calcutta.  This  Baranagore  Math,  as  the  new  monastery  was  called,  became 
the  first  headquarters  of  the  monks  of  the  Ramakrishna  Order.3  Its  centre  was 

3  The  monastery  remained  at  Baranagore  from  1886  to  1892;  then  it  was  shifted  to 
Alambazar,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Dakshineswar,  where  it  functioned  till  1897.  Next 
it  was  removed  to  the  garden  house  of  Nilambar  Mukherjee,  on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges 
across  from  Baranagore.  Finally,  the  permanent  monastery  was  dedicated  in  1898  at  the 
Belur  Math,  adjacent  to  Nilambar  Mukherjee’s  garden  house. 


Narendranath  at  the  Cossipore  Garden  (1886) 


VlVEKANANDA  AS  A  WANDERING  MONK 


Vivekananda  37 

the  shrine  room,  where  the  copper  vessel  containing  the  sacred  ashes  of  the 
Master  was  daily  worshipped  as  his  visible  presence.4 

Narendranath  devoted  himself  heart  and  soul  to  the  training  of  the  young 
brother  disciples.  He  spent  the  daytime  at  home,  supervising  a  lawsuit  that  was 
pending  in  the  court  and  looking  after  certain  other  family  affairs;  but  during 
the  evenings  and  nights  he  was  always  with  his  brothers  at  the  monastery, 
exhorting  them  to  practise  spiritual  disciplines.  His  presence  was  a  source  of 
unfailing  delight  and  inspiration  to  all. 

The  future  career  of  the  youths  began  to  take  shape  during  these  early  days 
at  Baranagore.  The  following  incident  hastened  the  process.  At  the  invitation 
of  the  mother  of  Baburam,  one  of  the  disciples,  they  all  went  to  the  village  of 
Antpur  to  spend  a  few  days  away  from  the  austerities  of  Baranagore.  Here  they 
realized,  more  intensely  than  ever  before,  a  common  goal  of  life,  a  sense  of 
brotherhood  and  unity  integrating  their  minds  and  hearts.  Their  consecrated 
souls  were  like  pearls  in  a  necklace  held  together  by  the  thread  of  Ramakrishna’s 
teachings.  They  saw  in  one  another  a  reservoir  of  spiritual  power,  and  the  vision 
intensified  their  mutual  love  and  respect.  Narendra,  describing  to  them  the 
glories  of  the  monastic  life,  asked  them  to  give  up  the  glamour  of  academic 
studies  and  the  physical  world,  and  all  felt  in  their  hearts  the  ground-swell  of 
the  spirit  of  renunciation.  This  reached  its  height  one  night  when  they  were 
sitting  for  meditation  around  a  fire,  in  the  fashion  of  Hindu  monks.  The  stars 
sparkled  overhead  and  the  stillness  was  unbroken  except  for  the  crackling  of 
the  firewood.  Suddenly  Naren  opened  his  eyes  and  began,  with  an  apostolic 
fervour,  to  narrate  to  the  brother  disciples  the  life  of  Christ.  He  exhorted  them 
to  live  like  Christ,  who  had  had  no  place  “to  lay  his  head.”  Inflamed  by  a  new 
passion,  the  youths,  making  God  and  the  sacred  fire  their  witness,  vowed  to 
become  monks.5  When  they  had  returned  to  their  rooms  in  a  happy  mood, 

4  Some  of  the  ashes  were  later  buried  at  Kankurgachi,  a  suburb  of  Calcutta,  where  a 
temple  was  built  by  the  Master’s  disciple  Ramchandra  Datta.  The  place  had  been  hal¬ 
lowed  by  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  visit  during  his  lifetime.  But  most  of  the  ashes  are  now  pre¬ 
served  in  the  shrine  at  the  Belur  Math. 

5  Some  time  after,  these  chosen  disciples  of  the  Master  performed  the  formal  sacrifice 
called  viraja  and  took  the  monastic  vows  of  celibacy  and  poverty.  Further,  they  dedicated 
their  lives  to  the  realization  of  God  and  the  service  of  men.  They  assumed  new  names  to 
signify  their  utter  severance  from  the  world.  Narendra,  who  later  became  world-famous 
as  Swami  Vivekananda,  did  not  take  that  name  till  his  departure  for  America  in  1893. 
Prior  to  that  he  assumed  the  names  of  Vividishananda  and  Satchidananda  in  order  to 
conceal  his  identity  from  the  public.  The  monastic  names  of  the  Master’s  disciples  who 
renounced  the  world  soon  after  his  death  were  as  follows: 


Narendra  .  .  . 

. Swami  Vivekananda 

Hari  . 

Rakhal  . 

. Swami  Brahmananda 

Sarat  . 

. Swami  Saradananda 

login . 

. Swami  Jogananda 

Sashi  . 

Swami  Ramakrishnananda 

Niranjan  .  .  .  . 

.  .  .  .Swami  Niranjanananda 

Kali . 

. Swami  Abhedananda 

Latu . 

. Swami  Adbhutananda 

Gangadhar  .... 

.  .  .  .  Swami  Akhandananda 

Baburam  .  .  .  . 

. Swami  Premananda 

Gopal  (elder)  . 

. Swami  Advaitananda 

Tarak . 

. Swami  Shivananda 

Sarada  Prasanna 

.  .Swami  Trigunatitananda 

Subodh  . 

38 


Vivekananda 


someone  found  out  that  it  was  Christmas  Eve,  and  all  felt  doubly  blest.  It  is 
no  wonder  that  the  monks  of  the  Ramakrishna  Order  have  always  cherished  a 
high  veneration  for  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

The  young  disciples,  after  their  return  to  Baranagore,  finally  renounced  home 
and  became  permanent  inmates  of  the  monastery.  And  what  a  life  of  austerity 
they  lived  there!  They  forgot  their  food  when  absorbed  in  meditation,  worship, 
study,  or  devotional  music.  At  such  times  Sashi,  who  had  constituted  himself 
their  caretaker,  literally  dragged  them  to  the  dining-room.  The  privations  they 
suffered  during  this  period  form  a  wonderful  saga  of  spiritual  discipline.  Often 
there  would  be  no  food  at  all,  and  on  such  occasions  they  spent  day  and  night 
in  prayer  and  meditation.  Sometimes  there  would  be  only  rice,  with  no  salt  for 
flavouring;  but  nobody  cared.  They  lived  for  months  on  boiled  rice,  salt,  and 
bitter  herbs.  Not  even  demons  could  have  stood  such  hardship.  Each  had  two 
pieces  of  loin-cloth,  and  there  were  some  regular  clothes  that  were  worn,  by 
turns,  when  anyone  had  to  go  out.  They  slept  on  straw  mats  spread  on  the  hard 
floor.  A  few  pictures  of  saints,  gods,  and  goddesses  hung  on  the  walls,  and 
some  musical  instruments  lay  here  and  there.  The  library  contained  about  a 
hundred  books. 

But  Narendra  did  not  want  the  brother  disciples  to  be  pain-hugging,  cross- 
grained  ascetics.  They  should  broaden  their  outlook  by  assimilating  the  thought- 
currents  of  the  world.  He  examined  with  them  the  histories  of  different  coun¬ 
tries  and  various  philosophical  systems.  Aristotle  and  Plato,  Kant  and  Hegel, 
together  with  Sankaracharya  and  Buddha,  Ramanuja  and  Madhva,  Chaitanya 
and  Nimbarka,  were  thoroughly  discussed.  The  Hindu  philosophical  systems  of 
Jnana,  Bhakti,  Yoga,  arid  Karma,  each  received  a  due  share  of  attention,  and  their 
apparent  contradictions  were  reconciled  in  the  light  of  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  teach¬ 
ings  and  experiences.  The  dryness  of  discussion  was  relieved  by  devotional 
music.  There  were  many  moments,  too,  when  the  inmates  indulged  in  light¬ 
hearted  and  witty  talk,  and  Narendra’s  bons  mots  on  such  occasions  always  con¬ 
vulsed  them  with  laughter.  But  he  would  never  let  them  forget  the  goal  of  the 
monastic  life:  the  complete  control  of  the  lower  nature,  and  the  realization  of 
God.  “During  those  days,”  one  of  the  inmates  of  the  monastery  said,  “he  worked 
like  a  madman.  Early  in  the  morning,  while  it  was  still  dark,  he  would  rise  from 
bed  and  wake  up  the  others,  singing,  'Awake,  arise,  all  who  would  drink  of  the 
Divine  Nectar!’  And  long  after  midnight  he  and  his  brother  disciples  would  still 
be  sitting  on  the  roof  of  the  monastery  building,  absorbed  in  religious  songs. 
The  neighbours  protested,  but  to  no  avail.  Pandits  came  and  argued.  He 
was  never  for  one  moment  idle,  never  dull.”  Yet  the  brothers  complained  that 
they  could  not  realize  even  a  fraction  of  what  Ramakrishna  had  taught. 

Some  of  the  householder  devotees  of  the  Master,  however,  did  not  approve 
of  the  austerities  of  the  young  men,  and  one  of  them  teasingly  inquired  if  they 
had  realized  God  by  giving  up  the  world.  “What  do  you  mean?”  Narendra  said 
furiously.  “Suppose  we  have  not  realized  God;  must  we  then  return  to  the  life 
of  the  senses  and  deprave  our  higher  nature?” 

Soon  the  youths  of  the  Baranagore  monastery  became  restless  for  the  life  of 
the  wandering  monk  with  no  other  possessions  except  staff  and  begging-bowl. 
Thus  they  would  learn  self-surrender  to  God,  detachment,  and  inner  serenity. 


Vivekananda 


39 


They  remembered  the  Hindu  proverb  that  the  monk  who  constantly  moves  on 
remains  pure,  like  water  that  flows.  They  wanted  to  visit  the  holy  places  and 
thus  give  an  impetus  to  their  spiritual  life. 

Narendra,  too,  wished  to  enjoy  the  peace  of  solitude.  He  wanted  to  test  his 
own  inner  strength  as  well  as  teach  the  others  not  to  depend  upon  him  always. 
Some  of  the  brother  disciples  had  already  gone  away  from  the  monastery  when 
he  began  his  wanderings.  The  first  were  in  the  nature  of  temporary  excursions; 
he  had  to  return  to  Baranagore  in  response  to  the  appeal  of  the  inmates  of  the 
monastery.  But  finally  in  1891,  when  he  struck  out  again — without  a  com¬ 
panion,  without  a  name,  with  only  a  staff  and  begging-bowl — he  was  swallowed 
in  the  immensity  of  India  and  the  dust  of  the  vast  sub-continent  completely 
engulfed  him.  When  rediscovered  he  was  no  longer  the  unknown  Naren,  but 
the  Swami  Vivekananda  who  had  made  history  in  Chicago  in  1893. 

IN  NORTHERN  INDIA 

In  order  to  satisfy  his  wanderlust,  Narendra  went  to  Benares,  considered  the 
holiest  place  in  India — a  city  sanctified  from  time  out  of  mind  by  the  associ¬ 
ation  of  monks  and  devotees.  Here  have  come  prophets  like  Buddha,  San- 
karacharya,  and  Chaitanya,  to  receive,  as  it  were,  the  commandment  of  God  to 
preach  their  messages.  The  Ganges  charges  the  atmosphere  with  a  rare  holiness. 
Narendra  felt  uplifted  by  the  spirit  of  renunciation  and  devotion  that  pervades 
this  sacred  place.  He  visited  the  temples  and  paid  his  respects  to  such  holy  men 
as  Trailanga  Swami,  who  lived  on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges  constantly  absorbed 
in  meditation,  and  Swami  Bhaskarananda,  who  annoyed  Naren  by  expressing 
doubt  as  to  the  possibility  of  a  man’s  total  conquest  of  the  temptation  of 
“woman”  and  “gold.”6  With  his  own  eyes  Naren  had  seen  the  life  of  Sri 
Ramakrishna,  who  had  completely  subdued  his  lower  nature. 

In  Benares,  one  day,  hotly  pursued  by  a  troop  of  monkeys,  he  was  running 
away  when  a  monk  called  to  him:  “Face  the  brutes.”  He  stopped  and  looked 
defiantly  at  the  ugly  beasts.  They  quickly  disappeared.  Later,  as  a  preacher,  he 
sometimes  used  this  experience  to  exhort  people  to  face  the  dangers  and  vicissi¬ 
tudes  of  life  and  not  run  away  from  them. 

After  a  few  days  Naren  returned  to  Baranagore  and  plunged  into  meditation, 
study,  and  religious  discourses.  From  this  time  he  began  to  feel  a  vague  pre¬ 
monition  of  his  future  mission.  He  often  asked  himself  if  such  truths  of  the 
Vedanta  philosophy  as  the  divinity  of  the  soul  and  the  unity  of  existence  should 
remain  imprisoned  in  the  worm-eaten  pages  of  the  scriptures  to  furnish  a  pastime 
for  erudite  scholars  or  to  be  enjoyed  only  by  solitary  monks  in  caves  and  the 
depths  of  the  wilderness;  did  they  not  have  any  significance  for  the  average 

6  The  words  woman  and  gold  occur  again  and  again  in  the  teachings  cf  Sri  Rama¬ 
krishna  to  designate  the  two  chief  impediments  to  spiritual  progress.  By  these  words  he 
really  meant  lust  and  greed,  the  baneful  influence  of  which  retards  the  aspirant’s  spiritual 
growth.  He  used  the  word  woman  as  a  concrete  term  for  the  sex  instinct  when  addressing 
his  men  devotees;  while  speaking  to  women,  however,  he  warned  them  against  man.  The 
word  gold  symbolizes  greed,  which  is  the  other  obstacle.  Sri  Ramakrishna  never  taught 
his  disciples  to  hate  any  woman,  or  womankind  in  general.  He  regarded  women  as  so 
many  images  of  the  Divine  Mother  of  the  universe. 


40 


Vivekananda 


man  struggling  with  life’s  problems?  Must  the  common  man,  because  of  his 
ignorance  of  the  scriptures,  be  shut  out  from  the  light  of  Vedanta? 

Narendra  spoke  to  his  brother  disciples  about  the  necessity  of  preaching  the 
strength-giving  message  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy  to  one  and  all,  and  espe¬ 
cially  to  the  down-trodden  masses.  But  these  monks  were  eager  for  their  own 
salvation,  and  protested.  Naren  said  to  them  angrily:  “All  are  preaching.  What 
they  do  unconsciously,  I  will  do  consciously.  Ay,  even  if  you,  my  brother  monks, 
stand  in  my  way,  I  will  go  to  the  pariahs  and  preach  in  the  lowest  slums.” 

After  remaining  at  Baranagore  a  short  while,  Naren  set  out  again  for  Benares, 
where  he  met  the  Sanskrit  scholar  Pramadadas  Mitra.  These  two  felt  for  each 
other  a  mutual  respect  and  affection,  and  they  discussed,  both  orally  and 
through  letters,  the  social  customs  of  the  Hindus  and  abstruse  passages  of  the 
scriptures.  Next  he  visited  Ayodhya,  the  ancient  capital  of  Rama,  the  hero  of 
the  Ramayana.  Lucknow,  a  city  of  gardens  and  palaces  created  by  the  Moslem 
Nawabs,  filled  his  mind  with  the  glorious  memories  of  Islamic  rule,  and  the 
sight  of  the  Taj  Mahal  in  Agra  brought  tears  to  his  eyes.  In  Vrindavan  he 
recalled  the  many  incidents  of  Krishna’s  life  and  was  deeply  moved. 

While  on  his  way  to  Vrindavan,  trudging  barefoot  and  penniless,  Naren  saw 
a  man  seated  by  the  roadside  enjoying  a  smoke.  He  asked  the  stranger  to  give 
him  a  puff  from  his  tobacco  bowl,  but  the  man  was  an  untouchable  and  shrank 
from  such  an  act;  for  it  was  considered  sacrilegious  by  Hindu  society.  Naren 
continued  on  his  way,  but  said  to  himself  suddenly:  “What  a  shame!  The 
whole  of  my  life  I  have  contemplated  the  non-duality  of  the  soul,  and  now  I 
am  thrown  into  the  whirlpool  of  the  caste-system.  How  difficult  it  is  to  get 
over  innate  tendencies!”  He  returned  to  the  untouchable,  begged  him  to  lend 
him  his  smoking-pipe,  and  in  spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  the  low-caste  man, 
enjoyed  a  hearty  smoke  and  went  on  to  Vrindavan. 

Next  we  find  Naren  at  the  railroad  station  of  Hathras,  on  his  way  to  the 
sacred  pilgrimage  centre  of  Hardwar  in  the  foothills  of  the  Himalayas.  The 
stationmastcr,  Sarat  Chandra  Gupta,  was  fascinated  at  the  very  first  sight  of 
him.  “I  followed  the  two  diabolical  eyes,”  he  said  later.  Narendra  accepted  Sarat 
as  a  disciple  and  called  him  “the  child  of  my  spirit.”  At  Hathras  he  discussed 
with  visitors  the  doctrines  of  Hinduism  and  entertained  them  with  music,  and 
then  one  day  confided  to  Sarat  that  he  must  move  on. 

“My  son,”  he  said,  “I  have  a  great  mission  to  fulfil  and  I  am  in  despair  at 
the  smallness  of  my  power.  My  guru  asked  me  to  dedicate  my  life  to  the  regen¬ 
eration  of  my  motherland.  Spirituality  has  fallen  to  a  low  ebb  and  starvation 
stalks  the  land.  India  must  become  dynamic  again  and  earn  the  respect  of  the 
world  through  her  spiritual  power.” 

Sarat  immediately  renounced  the  world  and  accompanied  Narendra  from 
Hathras  to  Hardwar.  The  two  then  went  on  to  Hrishikesh,  on  the  bank  of  the 
Ganges  several  miles  north  of  Hardwar,  where  they  found  themselves  among 
monks  of  various  sects,  who  were  practising  meditation  and  austerities.  Pres¬ 
ently  Sarat  fell  ill  and  his  companion  took  him  back  to  Hathras  for  treatment. 
But  Naren,  too,  had  been  attacked  with  malarial  fever  at  Hrishikesh.  He  now 
made  his  way  to  the  Baranagore  monastery. 

Naren  had  now  seen  northern  India,  the  Aryavarta,  the  sacred  land  of  the 


Vivekananda 


41 


Aryans,  where  the  spiritual  culture  of  India  had  originated  and  developed.  The 
main  stream  of  this  ancient  Indian  culture,  issuing  from  the  Vedas  and  the 
Upanishads  and  branching  off  into  the  Puranas  and  the  Tantras,  was  subse¬ 
quently  enriched  by  contributions  from  the  Saks,  the  Huns,  the  Greeks,  the 
Pathans,  the  Moghuls,  and  numerous  other  foreign  peoples.  Thus  India  devel¬ 
oped  a  unique  civilization  based  upon  the  ideal  of  unity  in  diversity.  Some  of  the 
foreign  elements  were  entirely  absorbed  into  the  traditional  Hindu  conscious¬ 
ness;  others,  though  flavoured  by  the  ancient  thought  of  the  land,  retained 
their  individuality.  Realizing  the  spiritual  unity  of  India  and  Asia,  Narendra 
discovered  the  distinctive  characteristics  of  Oriental  civilization:  renunciation  of 
the  finite  and  communion  with  the  Infinite. 

But  the  stagnant  life  of  the  Indian  masses,  for  which  he  chiefly  blamed  the 
priests  and  the  landlords,  saddened  his  heart.  Naren  found  that  his  country’s 
downfall  had  not  been  caused  by  religion.  On  the  contrary,  as  long  as  India 
had  clung  to  her  religious  ideals,  the  country  had  overflowed  with  material 
prosperity.  But  the  enjoyment  of  power  for  a  long  time  had  corrupted  the 
priests.  The  people  at  large  were  debarred  from  true  knowledge  of  religion, 
and  the  Vedas,  the  source  of  the  Hindu  culture,  were  completely  forgotten, 
especially  in  Bengal.  Moreover,  the  caste-system,  which  had  originally  been 
devised  to  emphasize  the  organic  unity  of  Hindu  society,  was  now  petrified. 
Its  real  purpose  had  been  to  protect  the  weak  from  the  ruthless  competition 
of  the  strong  and  to  vindicate  the  supremacy  of  spiritual  knowledge  over  the 
power  of  military  weapons,  wealth,  and  organized  labour;  but  now  it  was 
sapping  the  vitality  of  the  masses.  Narendra  wanted  to  throw  open  the  man¬ 
making  wisdom  of  the  Vedas  to  all,  and  thus  bring  about  the  regeneration  of  his 
motherland.  He  therefore  encouraged  his  brothers  at  the  Baranagore  monastery 
to  study  the  grammar  of  Panini,  without  which  one  could  not  acquire  first-hand 
knowledge  of  the  Vedas. 

The  spirit  of  democracy  and  equality  in  Islam  appealed  to  Naren’s  mind  and 
he  wanted  to  create  a  new  India  with  Vedantic  brain  and  Moslem  body. 
Further,  the  idea  began  to  dawn  in  his  mind  that  the  material  conditions  of 
the  masses  could  not  be  improved  without  the  knowledge  of  science  and  tech¬ 
nology  as  developed  in  the  West.  He  was  already  dreaming  of  building  a  bridge 
to  join  the  East  and  the  West.  But  the  true  leadership  of  India  would  have  to 
spring  from  the  soil  of  the  country.  Again  and  again  he  recalled  that  Sri  Rama- 
krishna  had  been  a  genuine  product  of  the  Indian  soil,  and  he  realized  that 
India  would  regain  her  unity  and  solidarity  through  the  understanding  of  the 
Master’s  spiritual  experiences. 

Naren  again  became  restless  to  “do  something,”  but  what,  he  did  not  know. 
He  wanted  to  run  away  from  his  relatives  since  he  could  not  bear  the  sight  of 
their  poverty.  He  was  eager  to  forget  the  world  through  meditation.  During  the 
last  part  of  December  1889,  therefore,  he  again  struck  out  from  the  Baranagore 
monastery  and  turned  his  face  towards  Benares.  “My  idea,”  he  wrote  to  a 
friend,  “is  to  live  in  Benares  for  some  time  and  to  watch  how  Viswanath  and 
Annapurna  deal  out  my  lot.  I  have  resolved  either  to  realize  my  ideal  or  to  lay 
down  my  life  in  the  effort — so  help  me  Lord  of  Benares!” 

On  his  way  to  Benares  he  heard  that  Swami  Jogananda,  one  of  his  brother 


42 


Vivekananda 


disciples,  was  lying  ill  in  Allahabad  and  decided  to  proceed  there  immediately. 
In  Allahabad  he  met  a  Moslem  saint,  “every  line  and  curve  of  whose  face 
showed  that  he  was  a  paramahamsa.”  Next  he  went  to  Ghazipur  and  there  he 
came  to  know  the  saint  Pavhari  Baba,  the  “air-eating  holy  man.” 

Pavhari  Baba  was  born  near  Benares  of  brahmin  parents.  In  his  youth  he  had 
mastered  many  branches  of  Hindu  philosophy.  Later  he  renounced  the  world, 
led  an  austere  life,  practised  the  disciplines  of  Yoga  and  Vedanta,  and  travelled 
over  the  whole  of  India.  At  last  he  settled  in  Ghazipur,  where  he  built  an 
underground  hermitage  on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges  and  spent  most  of  his  time 
in  meditation.  He  lived  on  practically  nothing  and  so  was  given  by  the  people 
the  sobriquet  of  the  “air-eating  holy  man”;  all  were  impressed  by  his  humility 
and  spirit  of  service.  Once  he  was  bitten  by  a  cobra  and  said  while  suffering 
terrible  pain,  “Oh,  he  was  a  messenger  from  my  Beloved!”  Another  day,  a  dog 
ran  off  with  his  bread  and  he  followed,  praying  humbly,  “Please  wait,  my 
Lord;  let  me  butter  the  bread  for  you.”  Often  he  would  give  away  his  meagre 
food  to  beggars  or  wandering  monks,  and  starve.  Pavhari  Baba  had  heard  of 
Sri  Ramakrishna,  held  him  in  high  respect  as  a  Divine  Incarnation,  and  kept 
in  his  room  a  photograph  of  the  Master.  People  from  far  and  near  visited  the 
Baba,  and  when  not  engaged  in  meditation  he  would  talk  to  them  from  behind 
a  wall.  For  several  days  before  his  death  he  remained  indoors.  Then,  one  day, 
people  noticed  smoke  issuing  from  his  underground  cell  with  the  smell  of 
burning  flesh.  It  was  discovered  that  the  saint,  having  come  to  realize  the 
approaching  end  of  his  earthly  life,  had  offered  his  body  as  the  last  oblation  to 
the  Lord,  in  an  act  of  supreme  sacrifice. 

Narendra,  at  the  time  of  his  meeting  Pavhari  Baba,  was  suffering  from  the 
severe  pain  of  lumbago,  and  this  had  made  it  almost  impossible  for  him  either 
to  move  about  or  to  sit  in  meditation.  Further,  he  was  mentally  distressed,  for 
he  had  heard  of  the  illness  of  Abhedananda,  another  of  his  brother  disciples, 
who  was  living  at  Hrishikesh.  “You  know  not,  sir,”  he  wrote  to  a  friend,  “that 
I  am  a  very  soft-natured  man  in  spite  of  the  stern  Vedantic  views  I  hold.  And 
this  proves  to  be  my  undoing.  For  however  I  may  try  to  think  only  of  my  own 
good,  I  begin,  in  spite  of  myself,  to  think  of  other  people’s  interests.”  Narendra 
wished  to  forget  the  world  and  his  own  body  through  the  practice  of  Yoga, 
and  went  for  instruction  to  Pavhari  Baba,  intending  to  make  the  saint  his  guru. 
But  the  Baba,  with  characteristic  humility,  put  him  off  from  day  to  day. 

One  night  when  Naren  was  lying  in  bed  thinking  of  Pavhari  Baba,  Sri 
Ramakrishna  appeared  to  him  and  stood  silently  near  the  door,  looking  intently 
into  his  eyes.  The  vision  was  repeated  for  twenty-one  days.  Narendra  under¬ 
stood.  He  reproached  himself  bitterly  for  his  lack  of  complete  faith  in  Sri 
Ramakrishna.  Now,  at  last,  he  was  convinced.  He  wrote  to  a  friend:  “Rama¬ 
krishna  has  no  peer.  Nowhere  else  in  the  world  exists  such  unprecedented 
perfection,  such  wonderful  kindness  to  all,  such  intense  sympathy  for  men  in 
bondage.”  Tearfully  he  recalled  how  Sri  Ramakrishna  had  never  left  unfulfilled 
a  single  prayer  of  his,  how  he  had  forgiven  his  offenses  by  the  million  and 
removed  his  afflictions. 

But  as  long  as  Naren  lived  he  cherished  sincere  affection  and  reverence  for 
Pavhari  Baba,  and  he  remembered  particularly  two  of  his  instructions.  One  of 


Vivekananda 


43 


these  was:  “Live  in  the  house  of  your  teacher  like  a  cow/’  which  emphasizes 
the  spirit  of  service  and  humility  in  the  relationship  between  the  teacher  and 
the  disciple.  The  second  instruction  of  the  Baba  was:  “Regard  spiritual  disci¬ 
pline  in  the  same  way  as  you  regard  the  goal/’  which  means  that  an  aspirant 
should  not  differentiate  between  cause  and  effect. 

Narendranath  again  breathed  peace  and  plunged  into  meditation.  After  a  few 
days  he  went  to  Benares,  where  he  learnt  of  the  serious  illness  of  Balaram  Bose, 
one  of  the  foremost  lay  disciples  of  Sri  Ramakrishna.  At  Ghazipur  he  had  heard 
that  Surendranath  Mitra,  another  lay  disciple  of  the  Master,  was  dying.  He 
was  overwhelmed  with  grief,  and  to  Pramadadas,  who  expressed  his  surprise  at 
the  sight  of  a  sannyasin  indulging  in  a  human  emotion,  he  said:  “Please  do  not 
talk  that  way.  We  are  not  dry  monks.  Do  you  think  that  because  a  man  has 
renounced  the  world  he  is  devoid  of  all  feeling?” 

He  came  to  Calcutta  to  be  at  the  bedside  of  Balaram,  who  passed  away  on 
May  13.  Surendra  Mitra  died  on  May  25.  But  Naren  steadied  his  nerves,  and 
in  addition  to  the  practice  of  his  own  prayer  and  meditation,  devoted  himself 
again  to  the  guidance  of  his  brother  disciples.  Sometime  during  this  period  he 
conceived  the  idea  of  building  a  permanent  temple  to  preserve  the  relics  of 
Sri  Ramakrishna. 

From  his  letters  and  conversations  one  can  gain  some  idea  of  the  great  storm 
that  was  raging  in  Naren’s  soul  during  this  period.  He  clearly  saw  to  what 
an  extent  the  educated  Hindus  had  come  under  the  spell  of  the  materialistic 
ideas  of  the  West.  He  despised  sterile  imitation.  But  he  was  also  aware  of  the 
great  ideals  that  formed  the  basis  of  European  civilization.  He  told  his  friends 
that  in  India  the  salvation  of  the  individual  was  the  accepted  goal,  whereas  in 
the  West  it  was  the  uplift  of  the  people,  without  distinction  of  caste  or  creed. 
Whatever  was  achieved  there  was  shared  by  the  common  man;  freedom  of 
spirit  manifested  itself  in  the  common  good  and  in  the  advancement  of  all  men 
by  the  united  efforts  of  all.  He  wanted  to  introduce  this  healthy  factor  into  the 
Indian  consciousness. 

Yet  he  was  consumed  by  his  own  soul’s  hunger  to  remain  absorbed  in 
samadhi.  He  felt  at  this  time  a  spiritual  unrest  like  that  which  he  had  experi¬ 
enced  at  the  Cossipore  garden  house  during  the  last  days  of  Sri  Ramakrishna’s 
earthly  existence.  The  outside  world  had  no  attraction  for  him.  But  another 
factor,  perhaps  unknown  to  him,  was  working  within  him.  Perfect  from  his 
birth,  he  did  not  need  spiritual  disciplines  for  his  own  liberation.  Whatever 
disciplines  he  practised  were  for  the  purpose  of  removing  the  veil  that  concealed, 
for  the  time  being,  his  true  divine  nature  and  mission  in  the  world.  Even 
before  his  birth,  the  Lord  had  chosen  him  as  His  instrument  to  help  Him  in 
the  spiritual  redemption  of  humanity. 

Now  Naren  began  to  be  aware  that  his  life  was  to  be  quite  different  from 
that  of  a  religious  recluse:  he  was  to  work  for  the  good  of  the  people.  Every 
time  he  wanted  to  taste  for  himself  the  bliss  of  samadhi,  he  would  hear  the 
piteous  moans  of  the  teeming  millions  of  India,  victims  of  poverty  and 
ignorance.  Must  they,  Naren  asked  himself,  for  ever  grovel  in  the  dust  and 
live  like  brutes?  Who  would  be  their  saviour? 

He  began,  also,  to  feel  the  inner  agony  of  the  outwardly  happy  people  of 


44 


Vivekananda 


the  West,  whose  spiritual  vitality  was  being  undermined  by  the  mechanistic 
and  materialistic  conception  of  life  encouraged  by  the  sudden  development  of 
the  physical  sciences.  Europe,  he  saw,  was  sitting  on  the  crater  of  a  smouldering 
volcano,  and  any  moment  Western  culture  might  be  shattered  by  its  fiery  erup¬ 
tion.  The  suffering  of  man,  whether  in  the  East  or  in  the  West,  hurt  his  tender 
soul.  The  message  of  Vedanta,  which  proclaimed  the  divinity  of  the  soul  and  the 
oneness  of  existence,  he  began  to  realize,  could  alone  bind  up  and  heal  the 
wounds  of  India  and  the  world.  But  what  could  he,  a  lad  of  twenty-five,  do? 
The  task  was  gigantic.  He  talked  about  it  with  his  brother  disciples,  but  received 
scant  encouragement.  He  was  determined  to  work  alone  if  no  other  help  was 
forthcoming. 

Narendra  felt  cramped  in  the  monastery  at  Baranagore  and  lost  interest  in 
its  petty  responsibilities.  The  whole  world  now  beckoned  him  to  work.  Hence, 
one  day  in  1890,  he  left  the  monastery  again  with  the  same  old  determination 
never  to  return.  He  would  go  to  the  Himalayas  and  bury  himself  in  the  depths 
of  his  own  thought.  To  a  brother  disciple  he  declared,  “I  shall  not  return  until 
I  gain  such  realization  that  my  very  touch  will  transform  a  man.”  He  prayed 
to  the  Holy  Mother  that  he  might  not  return  before  attaining  the  highest 
Knowledge,  and  she  blessed  him  in  the  name  of  Sri  Ramakrishna.  Then  she 
asked  whether  he  would  not  like  to  take  leave  of  his  earthly  mother.  '‘Mother,” 
Naren  replied,  “you  are  my  only  mother.” 

WANDERINGS  IN  THE  HIMALAYAS 

Accompanied  by  Swami  Akhandananda,  Naren  left  Calcutta  and  set  out  for 
Northern  India.  The  two  followed  the  course  of  the  Ganges,  their  first  halting- 
place  being  Bhagalpur.  To  one  of  the  people  who  came  to  visit  him  there 
Naren  said  that  whatever  of  the  ancient  Aryan  knowledge,  intellect,  and  genius 
remained  could  be  found  mostly  in  those  parts  of  the  country  that  lay  near  the 
banks  of  the  Ganges.  The  farther  one  departed  from  the  river,  the  less  one 
saw  of  that  culture.  This  fact,  he  believed,  explained  the  greatness  of  the  Ganges 
as  sung  in  the  Hindu  scriptures.  He  further  observed:  “The  epithet  ‘mild 
Hindu,’  instead  of  being  a  word  of  reproach,  ought  really  to  point  to  our  glory, 
as  expressing  greatness  of  character.  For  see  how  much  moral  and  spiritual 
advancement  and  how  much  development  of  the  qualities  of  love  and  com¬ 
passion  have  to  be  acquired  before  one  can  get  rid  of  the  brutish  force  of  one’s 
nature,  which  impels  a  man  to  slaughter  his  brother  men  for  self-aggrandize¬ 
ment.” 

He  spent  a  few  days  in  Benares  and  left  the  city  with  the  prophetic  words: 
“When  I  return  here  the  next  time,  I  shall  burst  upon  society  like  a  bomb¬ 
shell,  and  it  will  follow  me  like  a  dog.” 

After  visiting  one  or  two  places,  Naren  and  Akhandananda  arrived  at  Nainital, 
their  destination  being  the  sacred  Badarikasrama,  in  the  heart  of  the  Himalayas. 
They  decided  to  travel  the  whole  way  on  foot,  and  also  not  to  touch  money. 
Under  an  old  peepul  tree  by  the  side  of  a  stream  they  spent  many  hours  in 
meditation.  Naren  had  a  deep  spiritual  experience,  which  he  thus  jotted  down 
in  his  note-book: 


Vivekananda 


45 


In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  etc. 

The  microcosm  and  the  macrocosm  are  built  on  the  same  plan.  Just  as  the  individual 
soul  is  encased  in  a  living  body,  so  is  the  Universal  Soul,  in  the  living  prakriti  (nature), 
the  objective  universe.  Kali  is  embracing  Siva.  This  is  not  a  fancy.  This  covering  of  the  one 
(Soul)  by  the  other  (nature)  is  analogous  to  the  relation  between  an  idea  and  the  word 
expressing  it.  They  are  one  and  the  same,  and  it  is  only  by  a  mental  abstraction  that  one 
can  distinguish  them.  Thought  is  impossible  without  words.  Therefore  in  the  beginning 
was  the  Word,  etc. 

This  dual  aspect  of  the  Universal  Soul  is  eternal.  So  what  we  perceive  or  feel  is  the 
combination  of  the  eternally  formed  and  the  eternally  formless. 

Thus  Naren  realized,  in  the  depths  of  meditation,  the  oneness  of  the  universe 
and  man,  who  is  a  universe  in  miniature.  He  realized  that  all  that  exists  in  the 
universe  also  exists  in  the  body,  and  further,  that  the  whole  universe  exists  in 
the  atom. 

Several  other  brother  disciples  joined  Naren.  But  they  could  not  go  to 
Badarikasrama  since  the  road  was  closed  by  Government  order  on  account  of 
famine.  They  visited  different  holy  places,  lived  on  alms,  studied  the  scriptures, 
and  meditated.  At  this  time,  the  sad  news  arrived  of  the  suicide  of  one  of 
Naren’s  sisters  under  tragic  conditions,  and  reflecting  on  the  plight  of  Hindu 
women  in  the  cruel  present-day  society,  he  thought  that  he  would  be  a  criminal 
if  he  remained  an  indifferent  spectator  of  such  social  injustice. 

Naren  proceeded  to  Hrishikesh,  a  beautiful  valley  at  the  foot  of  the  Hima¬ 
layas,  which  is  surrounded  by  hills  and  almost  encircled  by  the  Ganges.  From 
an  immemorial  past  this  sacred  spot  has  been  frequented  by  monks  and 
ascetics.  After  a  few  days,  however,  Naren  fell  seriously  ill  and  his  friends 
despaired  of  his  life.  When  he  was  convalescent  he  was  removed  to  Meerut. 
There  he  met  a  number  of  his  brother  disciples  and  together  they  pursued  the 
study  of  the  scriptures,  practised  prayer  and  meditation,  and  sang  devotional 
songs,  creating  in  Meerut  a  miniature  Baranagore  monastery. 

After  a  stay  of  five  months  Naren  became  restless,  hankering  again  for  his 
wandering  life;  but  he  desired  to  be  alone  this  time  and  break  the  chain  of 
attachment  to  his  brother  disciples.  He  wanted  to  reflect  deeply  about  his 
future  course  of  action,  of  which  now  and  then  he  was  getting  glimpses. 
From  his  wanderings  in  the  Himalayas  he  had  become  convinced  that  the 
Divine  Spirit  would  not  allow  him  to  seal  himself  within  the  four  walls  of  a 
cave.  Every  time  he  had  thought  to  do  so,  he  had  been  thrown  out,  as  it  were, 
by  a  powerful  force.  The  degradation  of  the  Indian  masses  and  the  spiritual 
sickness  of  people  everywhere  were  summoning  him  to  a  new  line  of  action, 
whose  outer  shape  was  not  yet  quite  clear  to  him. 

In  the  later  part  of  January  1891,  Naren  bade  farewell  to  his  brother  disciples 
and  set  out  for  Delhi,  assuming  the  name  of  Swami  Vividishananda.  He  wished 
to  travel  without  being  recognized.  He  wanted  the  dust  of  India  to  cover  up 
his  footprints.  It  was  his  desire  to  remain  an  unknown  sannyasin,  among  the 
thousands  of  others  seen  in  the  country’s  thoroughfares,  market-places,  deserts, 
forests,  and  caves.  But  the  fires  of  the  Spirit  that  burnt  in  his  eyes,  and  his 
aristocratic  bearing,  marked  him  as  a  prince  among  men  despite  all  his  disguises. 


46 


Vivekananda 


In  Delhi,  Naren  visited  the  palaces,  mosques,  and  tombs.  All  around  the 
modern  city  he  saw  a  vast  ruin  of  extinct  empires  dating  from  the  prehistoric 
days  of  the  Mahabharata,  revealing  the  transitoriness  of  material  achievements. 
But  gay  and  lively  Delhi  also  revealed  to  him  the  deathless  nature  of  the  Hindu 
spirit. 

Some  of  his  brother  disciples  from  Meerut  came  to  the  city  and  accidentally 
discovered  their  beloved  leader.  Naren  was  angry.  He  said  to  them:  “Brethren! 
I  told  you  that  I  desired  to  be  left  alone.  I  asked  you  not  to  follow  me.  This  I 
repeat  once  more.  I  must  not  be  followed.  I  shall  presently  leave  Delhi.  No 
one  must  try  to  know  my  whereabouts.  I  shall  sever  all  old  associations.  Wher¬ 
ever  the  Spirit  leads,  there  I  shall  wander.  It  matters  not  whether  I  wander 
about  in  a  forest  or  in  a  desert,  on  a  lonely  mountain  or  in  a  populous  city. 
I  am  off.  Let  everyone  strive  to  realize  his  goal  according  to  his  lights." 

Narendra  proceeded  towards  historic  Rajputana,  repeating  the  words  of  the 
Dhammapada: 

Go  forward  without  a  path, 

Fearing  nothing,  caring  for  nothing, 

Wandering  alone,  like  the  rhinoceros! 

Even  as  a  lion,  not  trembling  at  noises, 

Even  as  the  wind,  not  caught  in  a  net, 

Even  as  the  lotus  leaf,  untainted  by  water, 

Do  thou  wander  alone,  like  the  rhinoceros! 

Several  factors  have  been  pointed  out  as  influencing  Naren’s  life  and  giving 
shape  to  his  future  message:  the  holy  association  of  Sri  Ramakrishna,  his  own 
knowledge  of  Eastern  and  Western  cultures,  and  his  spiritual  experiences.  To 
these  another  must  be  added:  the  understanding  of  India  gained  through  his 
wanderings.  This  new  understanding  constituted  a  unique  education  for  Naren. 
Here,  the  great  book  of  life  taught  him  more  than  the  printed  words  of  the 
libraries. 

He  mixed  with  all — today  sleeping  with  pariahs  in  their  huts  and  tomorrow 
conversing  on  equal  terms  with  Maharajas,  Prime  Ministers,  orthodox  pandits, 
and  liberal  college  professors.  Thus  he  was  brought  into  contact  with  their 
joys  and  sorrows,  hopes  and  frustrations.  He  witnessed  the  tragedy  of  present- 
day  India  and  also  reflected  on  its  remedy.  The  cry  of  the  people  of  India, 
the  God  struggling  in  humanity,  and  the  anxiety  of  men  everywhere  to  grasp 
a  hand  for  aid,  moved  him  deeply.  In  the  course  of  his  travels  Naren  came  to 
know  how  he  could  make  himself  a  channel  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  the  service 
of  mankind. 

During  these  wandering  days  he  both  learnt  and  taught.  The  Hindus  he 
asked  to  go  back  to  the  eternal  truths  of  their  religion,  hearken  to  the  message 
of  the  Upanishads,  respect  temples  and  religious  symbols,  and  take  pride  in 
their  birth  in  the  holy  land  of  India.  He  wanted  them  to  avoid  both  the  out¬ 
moded  orthodoxy  still  advocated  by  fanatical  leaders,  and  the  misguided  ration¬ 
alism  of  the  Westernized  reformers.  He  was  struck  by  the  essential  cultural 
unity  of  India  in  spite  of  the  endless  diversity  of  form.  And  the  people  who 
came  to  know  him  saw  in  him  the  conscience  of  India,  her  unity,  and  her 
destiny. 


Vivekananda 


47 


TRAVELS  IN  RAJPUTANA 

As  already  noted,  Narendranath  while  travelling  in  India  often  changed  his 
name  to  avoid  recognition.  It  will  not  be  improper  to  call  him,  from  this  point 
of  his  life,  by  the  monastic  title  of  “Swami,”  or  the  more  affectionate  and 
respectful  appellation  of  “Swamiji.” 

In  Alwar,  where  Swamiji  arrived  one  morning  in  the  beginning  of  February 
1891,  he  was  cordially  received  by  Hindus  and  Moslems  alike.  To  a  Moslem 
scholar  he  said:  '‘There  is  one  thing  very  remarkable  about  the  Koran.  Even 
to  this  day  it  exists  as  it  was  recorded  eleven  hundred  years  ago.  The  book  has 
retained  its  original  purity  and  is  free  from  interpolation.” 

He  had  a  sharp  exchange  of  words  with  the  Maharaja,  who  was  Westernized 
in  his  outlook.  To  the  latter's  question  as  to  why  the  Swami,  an  able-bodied 
young  man  and  evidently  a  scholar,  was  leading  a  vagabond’s  life,  the  Swami 
retorted,  “Tell  me  why  you  constantly  spend  your  time  in  the  company  of 
Westerners  and  go  out  on  shooting  excursions,  neglecting  your  royal  duties.” 
The  Maharaja  said,  “I  cannot  say  why,  but,  no  doubt,  because  I  like  to.” 
“Well,”  the  Swami  exclaimed,  “for  that  very  reason  I  wander  about  as  a  monk.” 

Next,  the  Maharaja  ridiculed  the  worship  of  images,  which  to  him  were 
nothing  but  figures  of  stone,  clay,  or  metal.  The  Swami  tried  in  vain  to  explain 
to  him  that  Hindus  worshipped  God  alone,  using  the  images  as  symbols.  The 
Prince  was  not  convinced.  Thereupon  the  Swami  asked  the  Prime  Minister 
to  take  down  a  picture  of  the  Maharaja,  hanging  on  the  wall,  and  spit  on  it. 
Everyone  present  was  horror-struck  at  this  effrontery.  The  Swami  turned  to  the 
Prince  and  said  that  though  the  picture  was  not  the  Maharaja  himself,  in  flesh 
and  blood,  yet  it  reminded  everyone  of  his  person  and  thus  was  held  in  high 
respect;  likewise  the  image  brought  to  the  devotee’s  mind  the  presence  of  the 
Deity  and  was  therefore  helpful  for  concentration,  especially  at  the  beginning 
of  his  spiritual  life.  The  Maharaja  apologized  to  Swamiji  for  his  rudeness. 

The  Swami  exhorted  the  people  of  Alwar  to  study  the  eternal  truths  of  Hindu¬ 
ism,  especially  to  cultivate  the  knowledge  of  Sanskrit,  side  by  side  with  Western 
science.  He  also  encouraged  them  to  read  Indian  history,  which  he  remarked 
should  be  written  by  Indians  following  the  scientific  method  of  the  West. 
European  historians  dwelt  mainly  on  the  decadent  period  of  Indian  culture. 

In  Jeypore  the  Swami  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  Sanskrit  grammar,  and 
in  Ajmere  he  recalled  the  magnificence  of  the  Hindu  and  Moslem  rules.  At 
Mount  Abu  he  gazed  in  wonder  at  the  Jain  temples  of  Dilwara,  which,  it  has 
been  said,  were  begun  by  titans  and  finished  by  jewellers.  There  he  accepted 
the  hospitality  of  a  Moslem  official.  To  his  scandalized  Hindu  friends  the 
Swami  said  that  he  was,  as  a  sannyasin  belonging  to  the  highest  order  of 
paramahamsas,  above  all  rules  of  caste.  His  conduct  in  dining  with  Moslems, 
he  further  said,  was  not  in  conflict  with  the  teachings  of  the  scriptures,  though 
it  might  be  frowned  upon  by  the  narrow-minded  leaders  of  Hindu  society. 

At  Mount  Abu  the  Swami  met  the  Maharaja  of  Khetri,  who  later  became 
one  of  his  devoted  disciples.  The  latter  asked  the  Swami  for  the  boon  of  a  male 
heir  and  obtained  his  blessing. 

Next  we  see  the  Swami  travelling  in  Gujrat  and  Kathiawar  in  Western  India. 


48 


Vivekananda 


In  Ahmedabad  he  refreshed  his  knowledge  of  Jainism.  Kathiawar,  containing 
a  large  number  of  places  sacred  both  to  the  Hindus  and  to  the  Jains,  was  mostly 
ruled  by  Hindu  Maharajas,  who  received  the  Swami  with  respect.  To  Babu 
Haridas  Beharidas,  the  Prime  Minister  of  the  Moslem  state  of  Junagad,  he 
emphasized  the  need  of  preaching  the  message  of  Hinduism  throughout  the 
world.  He  spent  eleven  months  in  Porebandar  and  especially  enjoyed  the  com¬ 
pany  of  the  Prime  Minister,  Pandit  Sankar  Pandurang,  a  great  Sanskrit  scholar 
who  was  engaged  in  the  translation  of  the  Vedas.  Impressed  by  the  Swami’s 
intellectuality  and  originality,  the  pandit  said:  “Swamiji,  I  am  afraid  you  cannot 
do  much  in  this  country.  Few  will  appreciate  you  here.  You  ought  to  go  the 
West,  where  people  will  understand  you  and  your  work.  Surely  you  can  give  to 
the  Western  people  your  enlightening  interpretation  of  Hinduism.” 

The  Swami  was  pleased  to  hear  these  words,  which  coincided  with  something 
he  had  been  feeling  within.  The  Prime  Minister  encouraged  the  Swami  to 
continue  his  study  of  the  French  language  since  it  might  be  useful  to  him  in 
his  future  work. 

During  this  period  the  Swami  was  extremely  restless.  He  felt  within  him  a 
boundless  energy  seeking  channels  for  expression.  The  regeneration  of  India 
was  uppermost  in  his  mind.  A  reawakened  India  could,  in  her  turn,  help  the 
world  at  large.  The  sight  of  the  pettiness,  jealousy,  disunion,  ignorance,  and 
poverty  among  the  Hindus  filled  his  mind  with  great  anguish.  But  he  had  no 
patience  with  the  Westernized  reformers,  who  had  lost  their  contact  with  the 
soul  of  the  country.  He  thoroughly  disapproved  of  their  method  of  social, 
religious,  and  political  reform  through  imitation  of  the  West.  He  wanted  the 
Hindus  to  cultivate  self-confidence.  Appreciation  of  India’s  spiritual  culture 
by  the  prosperous  and  powerful  West,  he  thought,  might  give  the  Hindus 
confidence  in  their  own  heritage.  He  prayed  to  the  Lord  for  guidance.  He  became 
friendly  with  the  Hindu  Maharajas  who  ruled  over  one-fifth  of  the  country  and 
whose  influence  was  great  over  millions  of  people.  Through  them  he  wanted 
to  introduce  social  reforms,  improved  methods  of  education,  and  other  measures 
for  the  physical  and  cultural  benefit  of  the  people.  The  Swami  felt  that  in  this 
way  his  dream  of  India’s  regeneration  would  be  realized  with  comparative  ease. 

After  spending  a  few  days  in  Baroda,  the  Swami  came  to  Khandwa  in  Central 
India.  Here  he  dropped  the  first  hint  of  his  willingness  to  participate  in  the 
Parliament  of  Religions  to  be  held  shortly  in  Chicago.  He  had  heard  of  this 
Parliament  either  in  Junagad  or  Porebandar. 

After  visiting  Bombay,  Poona,  and  Kolhapur,  the  Swami  arrived  at  Belgaum. 
In  Bombay  he  had  accidentally  met  Swami  Abhedananda  and  in  the  course  of 
a  talk  had  said  to  him,  “Brother,  such  a  great  power  has  grown  within  me  that 
sometimes  I  feel  that  my  whole  body  will  burst.” 

All  through  this  wandering  life  he  exchanged  ideas  with  people  in  all  stations 
and  stages  of  life  and  impressed  everyone  with  his  earnestness,  eloquence, 
gentleness,  and  vast  knowledge  of  Indian  and  Western  culture.  Many  of  the 
ideas  he  expressed  at  this  time  were  later  repeated  in  his  public  lectures  in 
America  and  India.  But  the  thought  nearest  to  his  heart  concerned  the  poor 
and  ignorant  villagers,  victims  of  social  injustice:  how  to  improve  the  sanitary 


Vivekananda 


49 


condition  of  the  villages,  introduce  scientific  methods  of  agriculture,  and  pro¬ 
cure  pure  water  for  daily  drinking;  how  to  free  the  peasants  from  their  illiteracy 
and  ignorance,  how  to  give  back  to  them  their  lost  confidence.  Problems  like 
these  tormented  him  day  and  night.  He  remembered  vividly  the  words  of  Sri 
Ramakrishna  that  religion  was  not  meant  for  “empty  bellies/’ 

To  his  hypochondriac  disciple  Haripada  he  gave  the  following  sound  advice: 
“What  is  the  use  of  thinking  always  of  disease?  Keep  cheerful,  lead  a  religious 
life,  cherish  elevating  thoughts,  be  merry,  but  never  indulge  in  pleasures  which 
tax  the  body  or  for  which  you  will  feel  remorse  afterwards;  then  all  will  be  well. 
And  as  regards  death,  what  does  it  matter  if  people  like  you  and  me  die?  That 
will  not  make  the  earth  deviate  from  its  axis!  We  should  not  consider  ourselves 
so  important  as  to  think  that  the  world  cannot  move  on  without  us.” 

When  he  mentioned  to  Haripada  his  desire  to  proceed  to  America,  the 
disciple  was  delighted  and  wanted  to  raise  money  for  the  purpose,  but  the 
Swami  said  to  him  that  he  would  not  think  about  it  until  after  making  his 
pilgrimage  to  Rameswaram  and  worshipping  the  Deity  there. 

SOUTH  INDIA 

From  Belgaum  the  Swami  went  to  Bangalore  in  the  State  of  Mysore,  which 
was  ruled  by  a  Hindu  Maharaja.  The  Maharaja’s  Prime  Minister  described  the 
young  monk  as  “a  majestic  personality  and  a  divine  force  destined  to  leave  his 
mark  on  the  history  of  his  country.”  The  Maharaja,  too,  was  impressed  by  his 
“brilliancy  of  thought,  charm  of  character,  wide  learning,  and  penetrating 
religious  insight.”  He  kept  the  Swami  as  his  guest  in  the  palace. 

One  day,  in  front  of  his  high  officials,  the  Maharaja  asked  the  Swami, 
“Swamiji,  what  do  you  think  of  my  courtiers?” 

“Well,”  came  the  bold  reply,  “I  think  Your  Highness  has  a  very  good  heart, 
but  you  are  unfortunately  surrounded  by  courtiers  who  are  generally  flatterers. 
Courtiers  are  the  same  everywhere.” 

“But,”  the  Maharaja  protested,  “my  Prime  Minister  is  not  such.  He  is 
intelligent  and  trustworthy.” 

“But,  Your  Highness,  a  Prime  Minister  is  'one  who  robs  the  Maharaja  and 
pays  the  Political  Agent.’  ” 

The  Prince  changed  the  subject  and  afterwards  warned  the  Swami  to  be 
more  discreet  in  expressing  his  opinion  of  the  officials  in  a  Native  State;  other¬ 
wise  those  unscrupulous  people  might  even  poison  him.  But  the  Swami  burst 
out:  “What!  Do  you  think  an  honest  sannyasin  is  afraid  of  speaking  the  truth, 
even  though  it  may  cost  him  his  very  life?  Suppose  your  own  son  asks  me  about 
my  opinion  of  yourself;  do  you  think  I  shall  attribute  to  you  all  sorts  of  virtues 
which  I  am  quite  sure  you  do  not  possess?  I  can  never  tell  a  lie.” 

The  Swami  addressed  a  meeting  of  Sanskrit  scholars  and  gained  their  applause 
for  his  knowledge  of  Vedanta.  He  surprised  an  Austrian  musician  at  the  Prince’s 
court  with  his  knowledge  of  Western  music.  He  discussed  with  the  Maharaja 
his  plan  of  going  to  America,  but  when  the  latter  came  forward  with  an  offer 
to  pay  his  expenses  for  the  trip,  he  declined  to  make  a  final  decision  before 
visiting  Rameswaram.  Perhaps  he  was  not  yet  quite  sure  of  God’s  will  in  the 


50 


Vivekananda 


matter.  When  pressed  by  the  Maharaja  and  the  Prime  Minister  to  accept  some 
gifts,  the  costlier  the  better,  the  Svvami  took  a  tobacco  pipe  from  the  one  and 
a  cigar  from  the  other. 

Now  the  Swami  turned  his  steps  towards  picturesque  Malabar.  At  Trivan¬ 
drum,  the  capital  of  Travancore,  he  moved  in  the  company  of  college  professors, 
state  officials,  and  in  general  among  the  educated  people  of  the  city.  They 
found  him  equally  at  ease  whether  discussing  Spencer  or  Sankaracharya,  Shake¬ 
speare  or  Kalidasa,  Darwin  or  Patanjali,  [ewish  history  or  Aryan  civilization.  He 
pointed  out  to  them  the  limitations  of  the  physical  sciences  and  the  failure 
of  Western  psychology  to  understand  the  superconscious  aspect  of  human 
nature. 

Orthodox  brahmins  regarded  with  abhorrence  his  habit  of  eating  animal  food. 
The  Swami  courageously  told  them  about  the  eating  of  beef  by  the  brahmins 
in  Vedic  times.  One  day,  asked  about  what  he  considered  the  most  glorious 
period  of  Indian  history,  the  Swami  mentioned  the  Vedic  period,  when  “five 
brahmins  used  to  polish  off  one  cow/’  He  advocated  animal  food  for  the  Hindus 
if  they  were  to  cope  at  all  with  the  rest  of  the  world  in  the  present  reign  of 
power  and  find  a  place  among  the  other  great  nations,  whether  within  or  out¬ 
side  the  British  Empire. 

An  educated  person  of  Travancore  said  about  him:  “Sublimity  and  simplicity 
were  written  boldly  on  his  features.  A  clean  heart,  a  pure  and  austere  life,  an 
open  mind,  a  liberal  spirit,  wide  outlook,  and  broad  sympathy  were  the  out¬ 
standing  characteristics  of  the  Swami.” 

At  Rameswaram  the  Swami  met  Bhaskara  Sctupati,  the  Raja  of  Ramnad, 
who  later  became  one  of  his  ardent  disciples.  He  discussed  with  the  Prince 
many  of  his  ideas  regarding  the  education  of  the  Indian  masses  and  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  their  agricultural  conditions.  The  Raja  urged  the  Swami  to  represent 
India  at  the  Parliament  of  Religions  in  Chicago  and  promised  to  help  him  in 
his  venture.  From  Rameswaram  the  Swami  went  to  Kanyakumari  (Cape 
Comorin),  which  is  the  southernmost  tip  of  India. 

THE  GREAT  VISION 

At  Cape  Comorin  the  Swami  became  as  excited  as  a  child.  He  rushed  to  the 
temple  to  worship  the  Divine  Mother.  He  prostrated  himself  before  the  Virgin 
Goddess.7  As  he  came  out  and  looked  at  the  sea  his  eyes  fell  on  a  rock.  Swim¬ 
ming  to  the  islet  through  shark-infested  waters,  he  sat  on  a  stone.  His  heart 
thumped  with  emotion.  His  great  journey  from  the  snow-capped  Himalayas  to 
the  “Land’s  End”  was  completed.  He  had  travelled  the  whole  length  of  the 
Indian  subcontinent,  his  beloved  motherland,  which,  together  with  his  earthly 
mother,  was  “superior  to  heaven  itself.” 

Sitting  on  the  stone,  he  recalled  what  he  had  seen  with  his  own  eyes:  the 
pitiable  condition  of  the  Indian  masses,  victims  of  the  unscrupulous  whims  of 
their  rulers,  landlords,  and  priests.  The  tyranny  of  caste  had  sapped  their  last 
drop  of  blood.  In  most  of  the  so-called  leaders  who  shouted  from  the  housetops 
for  the  liberation  of  the  people,  he  had  seen  selfishness  personified.  And  now 

7  The  Deity  worshipped  in  the  temple  is  known  as  Kanyakumari,  the  Virgin  Goddess, 
the  Junghau. 


Vivekananda 


51 


he  asked  himself  what  his  duty  was  in  this  situation.  Should  he  regard  the  world 
as  a  dream  and  go  into  solitude  to  commune  with  God?  He  had  tried  this 
several  times,  but  without  success.  He  remembered  that,  as  a  sannyasin,  he 
had  taken  the  vow  to  dedicate  himself  to  the  service  of  God;  but  this  God,  he 
was  convinced,  was  revealed  through  humanity.  And  his  own  service  to  this 
God  must  begin,  therefore,  with  the  humanity  of  India.  “May  I  be  born  and 
reborn/’  he  exclaimed,  “and  suffer  a  thousand  miseries,  if  only  I  may  worship 
the  only  God  in  whom  I  believe,  the  sum  total  of  all  souls,  and  above  all, 
my  God  the  wicked,  my  God  the  afflicted,  my  God  the  poor  of  all  races!” 

Through  austerity  and  self-control  the  Swami  had  conserved  great  spiritual 
power.  His  mind  had  been  filled  with  the  wisdom  of  the  East  and  the  West. 
He  had  received  in  abundance  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  blessings.  He  also  had  had 
many  spiritual  experiences  of  his  own.  He  must  use  all  of  these  assets,  he 
concluded,  for  the  service  of  God  in  man. 

But  what  was  to  be  the  way? 

The  clear-eyed  prophet  saw  that  religion  was  the  backbone  of  the  Indian 
nation.  India  would  rise  through  a  renewal  and  restoration  of  that  highest 
spiritual  consciousness  which  had  made  her,  at  all  times,  the  cradle  of  nations 
and  the  cradle  of  faith.  He  totally  disagreed  with  foreign  critics  and  their  Indian 
disciples  who  held  that  religion  was  the  cause  of  India’s  downfall.  The  Swami 
blamed,  rather,  the  falsehood,  superstition,  and  hypocrisy  that  were  practised 
in  the  name  of  religion.  He  himself  had  discovered  that  the  knowledge  of  God’s 
presence  in  man  was  the  source  of  man’s  strength  and  wisdom.  He  was  deter¬ 
mined  to  awaken  this  sleeping  divinity.  He  knew  that  the  Indian  culture  had 
been  created  and  sustained  by  the  twin  ideals  of  renunciation  and  service,  which 
formed  the  core  of  Hinduism.  And  he  believed  that  if  the  national  life  could  be 
intensified  through  these  channels,  everything  else  would  take  care  of  itself. 
The  workers  for  India’s  regeneration  must  renounce  selfishness,  jealousy,  greed, 
and  lust  for  power;  and  they  must  dedicate  themselves  to  the  service  of  the  poor, 
the  illiterate,  the  hungry,  and  the  sick,  seeing  in  them  the  tangible  manifestations 
of  the  Godhead.  People  required  education,  food,  health,  and  the  knowledge  of 
science  and  technology  to  raise  their  standard  of  living.  The  attempt  to  teach 
metaphysics  to  empty  stomachs  was  sheer  madness.  The  masses  everywhere 
were  leading  the  life  of  animals  on  account  of  ignorance  and  poverty;  therefore 
these  conditions  should  be  removed. 

But  where  would  the  Swami  find  the  fellow  workers  to  help  him  in  this 
gigantic  task? 

He  wanted  whole-time  servants  of  God,  workers  without  worldly  ties  or  vested 
interests.  And  he  wanted  them  by  thousands.  His  eyes  fell  upon  the  numerous 
monks  who  had  renounced  the  world  in  search  of  God.  But  alas,  in  present-day 
India  most  of  these  led  unproductive  lives.  He  would  have  to  infuse  a  new  spirit 
into  them,  and  they  in  their  turn  would  have  to  dedicate  themselves  to  the 
service  of  the  people.  He  hit  upon  a  plan,  which  he  revealed  later  in  a  letter  to 
a  friend.  “Suppose,”  the  Swami  wrote,  “some  disinterested  sannyasins,  bent 
on  doing  good  to  others,  went  from  village  to  village,  disseminating  education 
and  seeking  in  various  ways  to  better  the  condition  of  all  down  to  the  untouch¬ 
able,  through  oral  teaching  and  by  means  of  maps,  magic  lanterns,  globes,  and 


52 


Vivekananda 


other  accessories — would  that  not  bring  forth  good  in  time?  All  these  plans 
I  cannot  write  out  in  this  brief  letter.  The  long  and  short  of  it  is  that  if  the 
mountain  does  not  come  to  Mahomet,  Mahomet  must  go  to  the  mountain. 
The  poor  are  too  poor  to  go  to  schools;  they  will  gain  nothing  by  reading 
poetry  and  all  that  sort  of  thing.  We,  as  a  nation,  have  lost  our  individuality. 
We  have  to  give  back  to  the  nation  its  lost  individuality  and  raise  the  masses/' 

Verily,  the  Swami,  at  Kanyakumari,  was  the  patriot  and  prophet  in  one.  There 
he  became,  as  he  declared  later  to  a  Western  disciple,  “a  condensed  India." 

But  where  were  the  resources  to  come  from,  to  help  him  realize  his  great 
vision? 

He  himself  was  a  sannyasin,  a  penniless  beggar.  The  rich  of  the  country  talked 
big  and  did  nothing.  His  admirers  were  poor.  Suddenly  a  heroic  thought  entered 
his  mind:  he  must  approach  the  outside  world  and  appeal  to  its  conscience. 
But  he  was  too  proud  to  act  like  a  beggar.  He  wanted  to  tell  the  West  that  the 
health  of  India  and  the  sickness  of  India  were  the  concern  of  the  whole  world. 
If  India  sank,  the  whole  world  would  sink  with  her.  For  the  outside  world,  in 
turn,  needed  India,  her  knowledge  of  the  Soul  and  of  God,  her  spiritual  heritage, 
her  ideal  of  genuine  freedom  through  detachment  and  renunciation;  it  needed 
these  in  order  to  extricate  itself  from  the  sharp  claws  of  the  monster  of  material¬ 
ism. 

Then  to  the  Swami,  brooding  alone  and  in  silence  on  that  point  of  rock  off 
the  tip  of  India,  the  vision  came;  there  flashed  before  his  mind  the  new  con¬ 
tinent  of  America,  a  land  of  optimism,  great  wealth,  and  unstinted  generosity. 
He  saw  America  as  a  country  of  unlimited  opportunities,  where  people's  minds 
were  free  from  the  encumbrance  of  castes  or  classes.  He  would  give  the  receptive 
Americans  the  ancient  wisdom  of  India  and  bring  back  to  his  motherland,  in 
exchange,  the  knowledge  of  science  and  technology.  If  he  succeeded  in  his 
mission  to  America,  he  would  not  only  enhance  India's  prestige  in  the  Occident, 
but  create  a  new  confidence  among  his  own  people.  He  recalled  the  earnest 
requests  of  his  friends  to  represent  India  in  the  forthcoming  Parliament  of 
Religions  in  Chicago.  And  in  particular,  he  remembered  the  words  of  the 
friend  in  Kathiawar  who  had  been  the  first  to  encourage  him  to  go  to  the  West: 
“Go  and  take  it  by  storm,  and  then  return!" 

He  swam  back  to  the  continent  of  India  and  started  northwards  again,  by  the 
eastern  coast. 

It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  during  the  Swami’s  trip  across  the  country, 
just  described,  there  had  taken  place  many  incidents  that  strengthened  his  faith 
in  God,  intensified  his  sympathy  for  the  so-called  lower  classes,  and  broadened 
his  general  outlook  on  life  and  social  conventions. 

Several  times,  when  he  had  had  nothing  to  eat,  food  had  come  to  him 
unsought,  from  unexpected  quarters.  The  benefactors  had  told  him  that  they 
were  directed  by  God.  Then,  one  day,  it  had  occurred  to  the  Swami  that  he 
had  no  right  to  lead  the  life  of  a  wandering  monk,  begging  his  food  from 
door  to  door,  and  thus  depriving  the  poor  of  a  few  morsels  which  they  could 
otherwise  share  with  their  families.  Forthwith  he  entered  a  deep  forest  and 
walked  the  whole  day  without  eating  a  grain  of  food.  At  nightfall  he  sat  down 
under  a  tree,  footsore  and  hungry,  and  waited  to  see  what  would  happen  next. 


Vivekananda 


53 


Presently  he  saw  a  tiger  approaching.  “Oh,”  he  said,  “this  is  right;  both  of  us 
are  hungry.  As  this  body  of  mine  could  not  be  of  any  service  to  my  fellow  men, 
let  it  at  least  give  some  satisfaction  to  this  hungry  animal.”  He  sat  there  calmly, 
but  the  tiger  for  some  reason  or  other  changed  its  mind  and  went  off  in  another 
direction.  The  Swami  spent  the  whole  night  in  the  forest,  meditating  on  God’s 
inscrutable  ways.  In  the  morning  he  felt  a  new  surge  of  power. 

During  his  wanderings  in  the  Himalayas,  he  was  once  the  guest  of  a  Tibetan 
family  and  was  scandalized  to  see  that  polyandry  was  practised  by  its  members, 
six  brothers  sharing  a  common  wife.  To  the  Swami’s  protest,  the  eldest  brother 
replied  that  a  Tibetan  would  consider  it  selfishness  to  enjoy  a  good  thing  all 
by  himself  and  not  share  it  with  his  brothers.  After  deep  thought  the  Swami 
realized  the  relativity  of  virtue.  He  saw  that  many  so-called  good  and  evil 
practices  had  their  roots  in  the  traditions  of  society.  One  might  argue  for  or 
against  almost  anything.  The  conventions  of  a  particular  society  should  be 
judged  by  its  own  standards.  After  that  experience,  the  Swami  was  reluctant 
to  condemn  hastily  the  traditions  of  any  social  group. 

One  day  Swamiji  was  sharing  a  railway  compartment  with  two  Englishmen, 
who  took  him  for  an  illiterate  beggar  and  began  to  crack  jokes  in  English  at  his 
expense.  At  the  next  station  they  were  astonished  to  hear  him  talking  with  the 
station  master  in  perfect  English.  Embarrassed,  they  asked  him  why  he  had  not 
protested  against  their  rude  words.  With  a  smile,  the  Swami  replied,  “Friends, 
this  is  not  the  first  time  that  I  have  seen  fools.”  The  Englishmen  became  angry 
and  wanted  a  fight.  But  looking  at  the  Swami’s  strong  body,  they  thought  that 
discretion  was  the  better  part  of  valour,  and  apologized. 

In  a  certain  place  in  Rajputana,  the  Swami  was  kept  busy  for  three  days  and 
nights  by  people  seeking  religious  instruction.  Nobody  cared  about  his  food  or 
rest.  After  they  left,  a  poor  man  belonging  to  a  low  caste  offered  him,  with  great 
hesitation,  some  uncooked  food,  since  he,  being  an  untouchable,  was  afraid 
to  give  him  a  prepared  meal.  The  Swami,  however,  persuaded  the  kind-hearted 
man  to  prepare  the  meal  for  him  and  ate  it  with  relish.  Shedding  tears  of  grati¬ 
tude,  the  Swami  said  to  himself,  “Thousands  of  such  good  people  live  in 
huts,  and  we  despise  them  as  untouchables!” 

In  Central  India  he  had  to  pass  many  hard  days  without  food  or  shelter,  and 
it  was  during  this  time  that  he  lived  with  a  family  of  outcaste  sweepers  and 
discovered  the  many  priceless  spiritual  virtues  of  those  people,  who  cowered  at 
the  feet  of  society.  Their  misery  choked  him  and  he  sobbed:  “Oh,  my  country! 
Oh,  my  country!” 

To  resume  the  story  of  Swami ji’s  wandering  life:  From  Cape  Comorin 
he  walked  most  of  the  way  to  Madras,  stopping  at  Ramnad  and  Pondicherry. 
His  fame  had  already  spread  to  the  premier  city  of  South  India,  and  he  was 
greeted  by  a  group  of  enthusiastic  young  men.  In  Madras  he  publicly  announced 
his  intention  of  going  to  America.  His  devotees  here  collected  funds  for  the 
trip,  and  it  was  through  them  that  he  later  started  his  Indian  work  in  an 
organized  form. 

Here,  in  Madras,  he  poured  his  whole  soul  into  the  discussion  of  religion, 
philosophy,  science,  literature,  and  history.  He  would  blaze  up  at  people  who, 
for  lack  of  time  or  zeal,  did  not  practise  meditation.  “What!”  he  thundered 


54 


Vivekananda 


at  a  listener.  “Those  giants  of  old,  the  ancient  rishis,  who  never  walked  but 
strode,  standing  by  whose  side  you  would  shrivel  into  a  moth — they,  sir,  had 
time  for  meditation  and  devotions,  and  you  have  none!” 

To  a  scoffer  he  said:  “How  dare  you  criticize  your  venerable  forefathers  in 
such  a  fashion?  A  little  learning  has  muddled  your  brain.  Have  you  tested  the 
wisdom  of  the  rishis?  Have  you  even  as  much  as  read  the  Vedas?  There  is  a 
challenge  thrown  by  the  rishis.  If  you  dare  oppose  them,  take  it  up.” 

At  Hyderabad,  the  capital  of  the  Nizam’s  State,  he  gave  his  first  public  lec¬ 
ture,  the  subject  being  “My  Mission  to  the  West.”  The  audience  was  impressed 
and  the  Swami  was  pleased  to  see  that  he  could  hold  his  own  in  this  new  field 
of  activity. 

When  the  devotees  in  Madras  brought  him  the  money  for  his  voyage  to 
America,  he  refused  to  accept  it  and  asked  them  to  distribute  it  among  the 
poor.  How  was  he  to  know  that  the  Lord  wanted  him  to  go  to  America?  Per¬ 
haps  he  was  being  carried  away  by  his  own  ambition.  He  began  to  pray  intensely 
for  divine  guidance.  Again  money  was  offered  to  him  by  some  of  his  wealthy 
friends,  and  again  he  refused.  He  said  to  his  disciples:  “If  it  is  the  Mother’s 
wish  that  I  should  go  to  the  West,  then  let  us  collect  money  from  the  people. 
It  is  for  them  that  I  am  going  to  the  West — for  the  people  and  the  poor!” 

The  Swami  one  day  had  a  symbolic  dream,  in  which  he  saw  Sri  Ramakrishna 
walking  into  the  water  of  the  ocean  and  beckoning  him  to  follow.  He  also  heard 
the  authoritative  word  “Go!”  In  response  to  a  letter  that  he  had  written  to 
Sarada  Devi,  the  Holy  Mother,  she  gave  him  her  blessings  for  the  fulfilment  of 
his  desire,  knowing  that  it  was  Ramakrishna’s  wish  that  he  should  undertake 
the  journey  to  America.  And  now,  at  last,  he  felt  sure  of  his  call. 

When  everything  was  arranged  for  the  departure,  there  suddenly  arrived  in 
Madras  the  private  secretary  of  Swamiji’s  disciple  the  Maharaja  of  Khetri,  bear¬ 
ing  the  happy  news  of  the  birth  of  a  royal  son.  The  Swami  was  earnestly  desired 
to  bless  the  heir  apparent.  He  consented,  and  the  Maharaja  was  overjoyed  to 
see  him. 

The  Swami  assumed  at  the  Maharaja’s  request  the  name  of  Vivekananda, 
and  the  Maharaja  accompanied  him  as  far  as  Jeypore  when  he  departed  for 
Bombay. 

Here  in  Jeypore  an  incident  occurred  that  the  Swami  remembered  all  his  life. 
He  was  invited  by  the  Maharaja  to  a  musical  entertainment  in  which  a  nautch- 
girl  was  to  sing,  and  he  refused  to  come,  since  he  was  a  monk  and  not  permitted 
to  enjoy  secular  pleasures.  The  singer  was  hurt  and  sang  in  a  strain  of  lamenta¬ 
tion.  Her  words  reached  the  Swami’s  ears: 

Look  not,  O  Lord,  upon  my  sins! 

Is  not  Same-sightedness  Thy  name? 

One  piece  of  iron  is  used 
Inside  the  holy  shrine, 

Another  for  the  knife 
Held  in  the  butcher’s  hand; 

Yet  both  of  these  are  turned  to  gold 
When  touched  by  the  philosophers’  stone. 


Vivekananda 


55 


Sacred  the  Jumna’s  water, 

Foul  the  water  in  the  ditch; 

Yet  both  alike  are  sanctified 

Once  they  have  joined  the  Ganges’  stream. 

So,  Lord,  look  not  upon  my  sins! 

Is  not  Same-sightedness  Thy  name? 

The  Swami  was  deeply  moved.  This  girl,  whom  society  condemned  as  impure, 
had  taught  him  a  great  lesson:  Brahman,  the  Ever  Pure,  Ever  Free,  and  Ever 
Illumined,  is  the  essence  of  all  beings.  Before  God  there  is  no  distinction  of 
good  and  evil,  pure  and  impure.  Such  pairs  of  opposites  become  manifest  only 
when  the  light  of  Brahman  is  obscured  by  maya.  A  sannyasin  ought  to  look 
at  all  things  from  the  standpoint  of  Brahman.  He  should  not  condemn  any¬ 
thing,  even  a  so-called  impure  person. 

The  Swami  then  joined  the  party  and  with  tears  in  his  eyes  said  to  the  girl: 
“Mother,  I  am  guilty.  I  was  about  to  show  you  disrespect  by  refusing  to  come 
to  this  room.  But  your  song  awakened  my  consciousness/’ 

On  his  way  to  Bombay  the  Swami  stopped  at  the  Abu  Road  station  and  met 
Brahmananda  and  Turiyananda.  He  told  them  about  his  going  to  America. 
The  two  brother  disciples  were  greatly  excited.  He  explained  to  them  the  reason 
for  his  going:  it  was  India’s  suffering.  “I  travelled,”  he  said,  “all  over  India. 
But  alas,  it  was  agony  to  me,  my  brothers,  to  see  with  my  own  eyes  the  terrible 
poverty  of  the  masses,  and  I  could  not  restrain  my  tears!  It  is  now  my  firm 
conviction  that  to  preach  religion  amongst  them,  without  first  trying  to  remove 
their  poverty  and  suffering,  is  futile.  It  is  for  this  reason — to  find  means  for  the 
salvation  of  the  poor  of  India — that  I  am  going  to  America.” 

Addressing  Turiyananda,  he  said,  “Brother,  I  cannot  understand  your  so- 
called  religion.”  His  face  was  red  with  his  rising  blood.  Shaking  with  emotion, 
he  placed  his  hand  on  his  heart,  and  said:  “But  my  heart  has  grown  much, 
much  larger,  and  I  have  learnt  to  feel.  Believe  me,  I  feel  it  very  sadly.”  He  was 
choked,  and  then  fell  silent.  Tears  rolled  down  his  cheeks. 

Many  years  later  Turiyananda  said,  while  describing  the  incident:  “You  can 
imagine  what  went  through  my  mind  when  I  heard  these  pathetic  words  and 
saw  the  majestic  sadness  of  Swamiji.  ‘Were  not  these,’  I  thought,  ‘the  very 
words  and  feelings  of  Buddha?’  ”  And  he  remembered  that  long  ago  Naren  had 
visited  Bodh-Gaya  and  in  deep  meditation  had  felt  the  presence  of  Buddha. 

Another  scene  of  the  same  nature,  though  it  occurred  much  later,  may  be 
recounted  here.  Swami  Turiyananda  called  on  his  illustrious  brother  disciple, 
after  the  latter’s  triumphant  return  from  America,  at  the  Calcutta  home  of 
Balaram  Bose,  and  found  him  pacing  the  veranda  alone.  Deep  in  thought,  he 
did  not  notice  Turiyananda’s  presence.  He  began  to  hum  under  his  breath  a 
celebrated  song  of  Mirabai,  and  tears  welled  up  in  his  eyes.  He  stopped  and 
leaned  against  the  balustrade,  and  hid  his  face  in  his  palms.  He  sang  in  an 
anguished  voice,  repeating  several  times:  “Oh,  nobody  understands  my  sorrow!” 
And  again:  “Only  he  who  suffers  knows  the  depth  of  my  sorrow!”  The  whole 
atmosphere  became  heavy  with  sadness.  The  voice  pierced  Swami  Turiyananda’s 
heart  like  an  arrow;  but  he  could  not  understand  the  cause  of  Vivekananda’s 
suffering.  Then  he  suddenly  realized  that  it  was  a  tremendous  universal  sym- 


56 


Vivekananda 


pathy  with  the  suffering  and  oppressed  everywhere  that  often  made  him  shed 
tears  of  burning  blood;  and  of  these  the  world  would  never  know. 

The  Swami  arrived  in  Bombay  accompanied  by  the  private  secretary  to  the 
Maharaja  of  Khetri,  the  Prince  having  provided  him  with  a  robe  of  orange  silk, 
an  ochre  turban,  a  handsome  purse,  and  a  first-class  ticket  on  the  S.S.  “Penin¬ 
sular”  of  the  Peninsular  and  Orient  Company,  which  would  be  sailing  on 
May  31,  1893.  The  Maharaja  had  also  bestowed  on  him  the  name  by  which  he 
was  to  become  famous  and  which  was  destined  to  raise  India  in  the  estimation 
of  the  world. 

The  ship  steamed  out  of  the  harbour  on  the  appointed  day,  and  one  can 
visualize  the  Swami  standing  on  its  deck,  leaning  against  the  rail  and  gazing  at 
the  fast  fading  landscape  of  his  beloved  motherland.  What  a  multitude  of 
pictures  must  have  raced,  at  that  time,  through  his  mind:  the  image  of  Sri 
Ramakrishna,  the  Holy  Mother,  and  the  brother  disciples,  either  living  at  the 
Baranagore  monastery  or  wandering  through  the  plains  and  hills  of  India!  What 
a  burden  of  memories  this  lad  of  twenty-nine  was  carrying!  The  legacy  of  his 
noble  parents,  the  blessings  of  his  Master,  the  wisdom  learnt  from  the  Hindu 
scriptures,  the  knowledge  of  the  West,  his  own  spiritual  experiences,  India’s 
past  greatness,  her  present  sorrow,  and  the  dream  of  her  future  glory,  the 
hopes  and  aspirations  of  the  millions  of  India’s  brown  men  toiling  in  their 
brown  fields  under  the  scorching  tropical  sun,  the  devotional  stories  of  the 
Puranas,  the  dizzy  heights  of  Buddhist  philosophy,  the  transcendental  truths 
of  Vedanta,  the  subtleties  of  the  Indian  philosophical  systems,  the  soul-stirring 
songs  of  the  Indian  poets  and  mystics,  the  stone-carvings  and  the  frescoes  of 
the  Ellora  and  Ajanta  caves,  the  heroic  tales  of  the  Rajput  and  Marhatta 
fighters,  the  hymns  of  the  South  Indian  Alwars,  the  snow  peaks  of  the  towering 
Himalayas,  the  murmuring  music  of  the  Ganges — all  these  and  many  such 
thoughts  fused  together  to  create  in  the  Swami’s  mind  the  image  of  Mother 
India,  a  universe  in  miniature,  whose  history  and  society  were  the  vivid 
demonstration  of  her  philosophical  doctrine  of  unity  in  diversity.  And  could 
India  have  sent  a  son  worthier  than  Vivekananda  to  represent  her  in  the 
Parliament  of  Religions — a  son  who  had  learnt  his  spiritual  lessons  at  the 
feet  of  a  man  whose  very  life  was  a  Parliament  of  Religions — a  son  whose  heart 
was  big  enough  to  embrace  the  whole  of  humanity  and  to  feel  for  all  in  its 
universal  compassion? 

Soon  the  Swami  adjusted  himself  to  the  new  life  on  board  the  ship — a  life 
completely  different  from  that  of  a  wandering  monk.  He  found  it  a  great 
nuisance  to  look  after  his  suitcases,  trunk,  valise,  and  wardrobe.  His  orange  robe 
aroused  the  curiosity  of  many  fellow  passengers,  who,  however,  were  soon 
impressed  by  his  serious  nature  and  deep  scholarship.  The  vessel  ploughed 
through  the  blue  sea,  pausing  at  various  ports  on  the  way,  and  the  Swami 
enjoyed  the  voyage  with  the  happy  excitement  of  a  child,  devouring  eagerly  all 
he  saw. 

In  Colombo  he  visited  the  monasteries  of  the  Hinayana  Buddhists.  On  the 
way  to  Singapore  he  was  shown  the  favourite  haunts  of  the  Malay  pirates, 
whose  descendants  now,  as  the  Swami  wrote  to  an  Indian  friend,  under  the 
“leviathan  guns  of  modern  turreted  battleships,  have  been  forced  to  look  about 


Vivekananda 


57 


for  more  peaceful  pursuits."  He  had  his  first  glimpse  of  China  in  the  busy  port 
of  Hongkong,  where  hundreds  of  junks  and  dinghies  moved  about,  each  with 
the  wife  of  its  boatman  at  the  helm,  for  a  whole  family  lived  in  each  floating 
craft.  The  traveller  was  amused  to  notice  the  Chinese  babies,  most  of  whom 
were  tied  to  the  backs  of  their  mothers,  while  the  latter  were  busy  either  push¬ 
ing  heavy  loads  or  jumping  with  agility  from  one  craft  to  another.  And  there 
was  a  rush  of  boats  and  steam  launches  coming  in  and  going  out. 

'‘Baby  John,"  the  Swami  wrote  humorously  to  the  same  friend,  “is  every 
moment  in  danger  of  having  his  little  head  pulverized,  pigtail  and  all,  but  he 
does  not  care  a  fig.  The  busy  life  seems  to  have  no  charm  for  him,  and  he  is 
quite  content  to  learn  the  anatomy  of  a  bit  of  rice-cake  given  to  him  by  the 
madly  busy  mother.  The  Chinese  child  is  quite  a  little  philosopher  and  calmly 
goes  to  work  at  the  age  when  your  Indian  boy  can  hardly  crawl  on  all  fours. 
He  has  learnt  the  philosophy  of  necessity  too  well,  from  his  extreme  poverty." 

At  Canton,  in  a  Buddhist  monastery,  the  Swami  was  received  with  respect 
as  a  great  yogi  from  India.  He  saw  in  China,  and  later  in  Japan,  many  temples 
with  manuscripts  written  in  the  ancient  Bengali  script.  This  made  him  realize 
the  extent  of  the  influence  of  India  outside  her  own  borders  and  strengthened 
his  conviction  about  the  spiritual  unity  of  Asia. 

Next  the  boat  reached  Japan,  and  the  Swami  visited  Yokohama,  Osaka, 
Kyoto,  and  Tokyo.  The  broad  streets,  the  cage-like  little  houses,  the  pine- 
covered  hills,  and  the  gardens  with  shrubs,  grass-plots,  artificial  pools,  and  small 
bridges  impressed  him  with  the  innate  artistic  nature  of  the  Japanese  people. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  thoroughly  organized  Japanese  army  equipped  with 
guns  made  in  Japan,  the  expanding  navy,  the  merchant  marine,  and  the  indus¬ 
trial  factories  revealed  to  him  the  scientific  skill  of  a  newly  awakened  Asiatic 
nation.  But  he  was  told  that  the  Japanese  regarded  India  as  the  “dreamland  of 
everything  noble  and  great." 

His  thoughts  always  returned  to  India  and  her  people.  He  wrote  to  a  disciple 
in  Madras:  “Come  out  and  be  men!  India  wants  the  sacrifice  of  at  least  a  thou¬ 
sand  of  her  young  men — men,  mind  you,  and  not  brutes.  How  many  men, 
unselfish  and  thoroughgoing  men,  is  Madras  ready  to  supply,  who  will  struggle 
unto  death  to  bring  about  a  new  state  of  things — sympathy  for  the  poor,  bread 
for  hungry  mouths,  enlightenment  for  the  people  at  large,  who  have  been 
brought  to  the  level  of  beasts  by  the  tyranny  of  your  forefathers?" 

From  Yokohama  he  crossed  the  Pacific  Ocean  and  arrived  in  Vancouver, 
British  Columbia.  Next  he  travelled  by  train  to  Chicago,  the  destination  of  his 
journey  and  the  meeting-place  of  the  Parliament  of  Religions. 

THE  NEW  WORLD 

The  first  sight  of  Chicago,  the  third  largest  city  of  the  New  Continent, 
the  great  civic  queen  of  the  Middle  West,  enthroned  on  the  shore  of  Lake 
Michigan,  with  its  teeming  population  and  strange  way  of  life — a  mixture  of 
the  refinement  of  the  Eastern  coast  and  the  crudities  of  the  backwoods — must 
have  bewildered,  excited,  and  terrified  the  young  visitor  from  India.  Swami 
Vivekananda  walked  through  the  spacious  grounds  of  the  World’s  Fair  and 
was  speechless  with  amazement.  He  marvelled  at  what  the  Americans  had 


Vivekananda 


58 

achieved  through  hard  work,  friendly  co-operation  with  one  another,  and  the 
application  of  scientific  knowledge.  Not  too  many  years  before,  Chicago  had 
consisted  of  only  a  few  fishermen’s  huts,  and  now  at  the  magic  touch  of  human 
ingenuity,  it  was  turned  into  a  fairyland.  Never  before  had  the  Swami  seen 
such  an  accumulation  of  wealth,  power,  and  inventive  genius  in  a  nation.  In 
the  fair-grounds  he  attracted  people’s  notice.  Lads  ran  after  him,  fascinated  by 
his  orange  robe  and  turban.  Shopkeepers  and  porters  regarded  him  as  a 
Maharaja  from  India  and  tried  to  impose  upon  him.  On  the  Swami’s  part,  his 
first  feeling  was  one  of  unbounded  admiration.  But  a  bitter  disillusionment  was 
to  come. 

Soon  after  his  arrival  in  Chicago,  he  went  one  day  to  the  information  bureau 
of  the  Exposition  to  ask  about  the  forthcoming  Parliament  of  Religions.  He  was 
told  that  it  had  been  put  off  until  the  first  week  of  September  fit  was  then 
only  the  middle  of  July)  and  that  no  one  without  credentials  from  a  bona  fide 
organization  would  be  accepted  as  a  delegate.  He  was  told  also  that  it  was 
then  too  late  for  him  to  be  registered  as  a  delegate.  All  this  had  been  unex¬ 
pected  by  the  Swami;  for  not  one  of  his  friends  in  India — the  enthusiastic 
devotees  of  Madras,  the  Maharajas  of  Khetri,  Ramnad,  and  Mysore,  the  Min¬ 
isters  of  the  native  states,  and  the  disciples  who  had  arranged  his  trip  to  America 
— had  taken  the  trouble  to  make  any  inquiries  concerning  the  details  of  the 
Parliament.  No  one  had  known  what  were  to  be  the  dates  of  the  meetings  or 
the  conditions  of  admission.  Nor  had  the  Swami  brought  with  him  any  letter 
of  authority  from  a  religious  organization.  All  had  felt  that  the  young  monk 
would  need  no  letter  of  authorization,  his  personality  being  testimonial  enough. 

“The  Swami  himself,”  as  his  Irish  disciple,  Sister  Nivedita,  wrote  some  years 
later,  “was  as  simple  in  the  ways  of  the  world  as  these  his  disciples,  and  when 
he  was  once  sure  that  he  was  divinely  called  to  make  this  attempt,  he  could 
see  no  difficulties  in  the  way.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  typical  of  the  lack 
of  organizedness  of  Hinduism  itself  than  this  going  forth  of  its  representative 
unannounced,  and  without  formal  credentials,  to  enter  the  strongly  guarded 
door  of  the  world’s  wealth  and  power.” 

In  the  meantime,  the  purse  that  the  Swami  had  carried  from  India  was 
dwindling;  for  things  were  much  more  expensive  in  America  than  he  or  his 
friends  had  thought.  He  did  not  have  enough  to  maintain  him  in  Chicago  until 
September.  In  a  frantic  mood  he  asked  help  from  the  Theosophical  Society, 
which  professed  warm  friendship  for  India.  He  was  told  that  he  would  have  to 
subscribe  to  the  creed  of  the  Society;  but  this  he  refused  to  do  because  he  did 
not  believe  in  most  of  the  Theosophical  doctrines.  Thereupon  the  leader 
declined  to  give  him  any  help.  The  Swami  became  desperate  and  cabled  to  his 
friends  in  Madras  for  money. 

Finally,  however,  someone  advised  him  to  go  to  Boston,  where  the  cost  of 
living  was  cheaper,  and  in  the  train  his  picturesque  dress,  no  less  than  his  regal 
appearance,  attracted  a  wealthy  lady  who  resided  in  the  suburbs  of  the  city. 
She  cordially  invited  him  to  be  her  guest,  and  he  accepted,  to  save  his  dwindling 
purse.  He  was  lodged  at  “Breezy  Meadows,”  in  Metcalf,  Massachusetts,  and 
the  lady  was  delighted  to  display  to  her  inquisitive  friends  this  strange  curiosity 
from  the  Far  East.  The  Swami  met  a  number  of  people,  most  of  whom  annoyed 


Vivekananda 


59 


him  by  asking  queer  questions  regarding  Hinduism  and  the  social  customs  of 
India,  about  which  they  had  read  in  the  tracts  of  Christian  missionaries  and 
sensational  writers.  However,  there  came  to  him  a  few  serious-minded  people, 
and  among  these  were  Mrs.  Johnson,  the  lady  superintendent  of  a  women’s 
prison,  and  J.  H.  Wright,  a  professor  of  Greek  at  Harvard  University.  On  the 
invitation  of  the  superintendent,  he  visited  the  prison  and  was  impressed  by 
the  humanitarian  attitude  of  its  workers  towards  the  inmates.  At  once  there 
came  to  his  mind  the  sad  plight  of  the  masses  of  India  and  he  wrote  to  a  friend 
on  August  20,  1893: 

How  benevolently  the  inmates  are  treated,  how  they  are  reformed  and  sent  back  as 
useful  members  of  society — how  grand,  how  beautiful,  you  must  see  to  believe!  And  oh, 
how  my  heart  ached  to  think  of  what  we  think  of  the  poor,  the  low,  in  India.  They  have 
no  chance,  no  escape,  no  way  to  climb  up.  They  sink  lower  and  lower  every  day,  they 
feel  the  blows  showered  upon  them  by  a  cruel  society,  and  they  do  not  know  whence  the 
blows  come.  They  have  forgotten  that  they  too  are  men.  And  the  result  is  slavery.  .  .  . 
Ah,  tyrants!  You  do  not  know  that  the  obverse  is  tyranny  and  the  reverse,  slavery. 

Swami  Vivekananda  had  no  friends  in  this  foreign  land,  yet  he  did  not  lose 
faith.  For  had  not  a  kind  Providence  looked  after  him  during  the  uncertain 
days  of  his  wandering  life?  He  wrote  in  the  same  letter:  “I  am  here  amongst 
the  children  of  the  Son  of  Mary,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  will  help  me.” 

The  Swami  was  encouraged  by  Professor  Wright  to  represent  Hinduism  in 
the  Parliament  of  Religions,  since  that  was  the  only  way  he  could  be  introduced 
to  the  nation  at  large.  When  he  announced,  however,  that  he  had  no  creden¬ 
tials,  the  professor  replied,  “To  ask  you,  Swami,  for  your  credentials  is  like 
asking  the  sun  about  its  right  to  shine.”  He  wrote  about  the  Swami  to  a  number 
of  important  people  connected  with  the  Parliament,  especially  to  the  chairman 
of  the  committee  on  selection  of  delegates,  who  was  one  of  his  friends,  and  said, 
“Here  is  a  man  more  learned  than  all  our  learned  professors  put  together.” 
Professor  Wright  bought  the  Swami's  railroad  ticket  for  Chicago. 

The  train  bearing  Vivekananda  to  Chicago  arrived  late  in  the  evening,  and 
he  had  mislaid,  unfortunately,  the  address  of  the  committee  in  charge  of  the 
delegates.  He  did  not  know  where  to  turn  for  help,  and  no  one  bothered  to 
give  information  to  this  foreigner  of  strange  appearance.  Moreover  the  station 
was  located  in  a  part  of  the  city  inhabited  mostly  by  Germans,  who  could 
hardly  understand  his  language.  He  knew  he  was  stranded  there,  and  looking 
around  saw  a  huge  empty  wagon  in  the  railroad  freight-yard.  In  this  he  spent 
the  night,  without  food  or  a  bed. 

In  the  morning  he  woke  up  “smelling  fresh  water,”  to  quote  his  own  words, 
and  he  walked  along  the  fashionable  Lake  Shore  Drive,  which  was  lined  with 
the  mansions  of  the  wealthy,  asking  people  the  way  to  the  Parliament  grounds. 
But  he  was  met  with  indifference.  Hungry  and  weary,  he  knocked  at  several 
doors  for  food  and  was  rudely  treated  by  the  servants.  His  soiled  clothes  and 
unshaven  face  gave  him  the  appearance  of  a  tramp.  Besides,  he  had  forgotten 
that  he  was  in  a  land  that  knew  thousands  of  ways  of  earning  the  “almighty 
dollar,”  but  was  unfamiliar  with  Franciscan  poverty  or  the  ways  of  religious 
vagabonds.  He  sat  down  exhausted  on  the  sidewalk  and  was  noticed  from  an 


60 


Vivekananda 


opposite  window.  The  mistress  of  the  house  sent  for  him  and  asked  the  Swami 
if  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Parliament  of  Religions.  He  told  her  of  his  difficulties. 
The  lady,  Mrs.  George  W.  Hale,  a  society  woman  of  Chicago,  gave  him  break¬ 
fast  and  looked  after  his  needs.  When  he  had  rested,  she  accompanied  him  to 
the  offices  of  the  Parliament  and  presented  him  to  Dr.  f.  H.  Barrows,  the 
President  of  the  Parliament,  who  was  one  of  her  personal  friends.  The  Swami 
was  thereupon  cordially  accepted  as  a  representative  of  Hinduism  and  lodged 
with  the  other  Oriental  delegates.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hale  and  their  children  became 
his  life-long  friends.  Once  again  the  Swami  had  been  strengthened  in  his  con¬ 
viction  that  the  Lord  was  guiding  his  footsteps,  and  he  prayed  incessantly  to 
be  a  worthy  instrument  of  His  will. 

THE  PARLIAMENT  OF  RELIGIONS 

On  Monday,  September  11,  1893,  the  Parliament  of  Religions  opened  its 
deliberations  with  due  solemnity.  This  great  meeting  was  an  adjunct  of  the 
World’s  Columbian  Exposition,  which  had  been  organized  to  celebrate  the 
four  hundredth  anniversary  of  the  discovery  of  America  by  Christopher  Colum¬ 
bus.  One  of  the  main  goals  of  the  Exposition  was  to  disseminate  knowledge 
of  the  progress  and  enlightenment  brought  about  in  the  world  by  Western 
savants  and  especially  through  physical  science  and  technology;  but  as  religion 
forms  a  vital  factor  in  human  culture,  it  had  been  decided  to  organize  a  Parlia¬ 
ment  of  Religions  in  conjunction  with  the  Exposition. 

Dr.  Barrows,  in  his  history  of  the  Parliament  of  Religions,  writes: 

Since  faith  in  a  Divine  Power  to  whom  men  believe  the)’  owe  service  and  worship  has 
been,  like  the  sun,  a  life-giving  and  fructifying  potency  in  man's  intellectual  and  moral 
development;  since  Religion  lies  back  of  Hindu  literature  with  its  marvellous  and  mystic 
developments;  of  the  European  Art,  whether  in  the  form  of  Grecian  statues  or  Gothic 
cathedrals;  and  of  American  liberty  and  the  recent  uprisings  of  men  in  behalf  of  a  juster 
social  condition;  and  since  it  is  as  clear  as  the  light  that  the  Religion  of  Christ  has  led 
to  many  of  the  chief  and  noblest  developments  of  our  modern  civilization,  it  did  not 
appear  that  Religion,  any  more  than  Education,  Art,  or  Electricity,  should  be  excluded 
from  the  Columbian  Exposition. 

It  is  not  altogether  improbable  that  some  of  the  more  enthusiastic  Christian 
theologians,  among  the  promoters  of  the  Parliament,  thought  that  the  Parlia¬ 
ment  would  give  them  an  opportunity  to  prove  the  superiority  of  Christianity, 
professed  bv  the  vast  majority  of  the  people  of  the  progressive  West,  over  the- 
other  faiths  of  the  world.  Much  later  Swami  Vivekananda  said,  in  one  of  his 
jocular  moods,  that  the  Divine  Mother  Herself  willed  the  Parliament  in  order 
to  give  him  an  opportunity  to  present  the  Eternal  Religion  of  the  Hindus 
before  the  world  at  large,  and  that  the  stage  was  set  for  him  to  play  his  impor¬ 
tant  role,  everything  else  being  incidental.  The  appropriateness  of  this  remark 
can  be  appreciated  now,  half  a  century  after  the  great  event,  from  the  fact  that 
whereas  all  else  that  was  said  and  discussed  at  the  Parliament  has  been  for¬ 
gotten,  what  Vivekananda  preached  is  still  cherished  in  America,  and  the  move¬ 
ment  inaugurated  by  him  has  endeared  itself  to  American  hearts. 

"One  of  the  chief  advantages,”  to  quote  the  words  of  the  Hon.  Mr.  Merwin- 
Marie  Snell,  president  of  the  Scientific  Section  of  the  Parliament,  “has  been 


Vivekananda 


61 


in  the  great  lessons  which  it  has  taught  the  Christian  world,  especially  the 
people  of  the  United  States,  namely,  that  there  are  other  religions  more 
venerable  than  Christianity,  which  surpass  it  in  philosophical  depth,  in  spiritual 
intensity,  in  independent  vigour  of  thought,  and  in  breadth  and  sincerity  of 
human  sympathy,  while  not  yielding  to  it  a  single  hair’s  breadth  in  ethical 
beauty  and  efficiency.” 

At  10  a.m.  the  Parliament  opened.  In  it  every  form  of  organized  religious 
belief,  as  professed  among  twelve  hundred  millions  of  people,  was  represented. 
Among  the  non-Christian  groups  could  be  counted  Plinduism,  Jainism, 
Buddhism,  Confucianism,  Shintoism,  Mohammedanism,  and  Mazdaism. 

The  spacious  hall  and  the  huge  gallery  of  the  Art  Palace  were  packed  with 
seven  thousand  people — men  and  women  representing  the  culture  of  the  United 
States.  The  official  delegates  marched  in  a  grand  procession  to  the  platform, 
and  in  the  centre,  in  his  scarlet  robe,  sat  Cardinal  Gibbons,  the  highest  prelate 
of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  in  the  Western  hemisphere.  He  occupied  a 
chair  of  state  and  opened  the  meeting  with  a  prayer.  On  his  left  and  right  were 
grouped  the  Oriental  delegates:  Pratap  Chandra  Mazoomdar  of  the  Calcutta 
Brahmo  Samaj,  and  Nagarkar  of  Bombay;  Dharmapala,  representing  the  Ceylon 
Buddhists;  Gandhi,  representing  the  Jains;  Chakravarti  and  Annie  Besant  of 
the  Theosophical  Society.  With  them  sat  Swami  Vivekananda,  who  represented 
no  particular  sect,  but  the  Universal  Religion  of  the  Vedas,  and  who  spoke, 
as  will  presently  be  seen,  for  the  religious  aspiration  of  all  humanity.  His  gor¬ 
geous  robe,  large  yellow  turban,  bronze  complexion,  and  fine  features  stood  out 
prominently  on  the  platform  and  drew  everybody’s  notice.  In  numerical  order 
the  Swami’s  position  was  number  thirty-one. 

The  delegates  arose,  one  by  one,  and  read  prepared  speeches,  but  the  Hindu 
sannyasin  was  totally  unprepared.  He  had  never  before  addressed  such  an  assem¬ 
bly.  When  he  was  asked  to  give  his  message  he  was  seized  with  stage-fright, 
and  requested  the  chairman  to  call  on  him  a  little  later.  Several  times  he  post¬ 
poned  the  summons.  As  he  admitted  later:  “Of  course  my  heart  was  fluttering 
and  my  tongue  nearly  dried  up.  I  was  so  nervous  that  I  could  not  venture  to 
speak  in  the  morning  session.” 

At  last  he  came  to  the  rostrum  and  Dr.  Barrows  introduced  him.  Bowing  to 
Sarasvati,  the  Goddess  of  Wisdom,  he  addressed  the  audience  as  “Sisters  and 
Brothers  of  America.”  Instantly,  thousands  arose  in  their  seats  and  gave  him 
loud  applause.  They  were  deeply  moved  to  see,  at  last,  a  man  who  discarded 
formal  words  and  spoke  to  them  with  the  natural  and  candid  warmth  of  a 
brother. 

It  took  a  full  two  minutes  before  the  tumult  subsided,  and  the  Swami  began 
his  speech  by  thanking  the  youngest  of  the  nations  in  the  name  of  the  most 
ancient  monastic  order  in  the  world,  the  Vedic  order  of  sannyasins.  The  key¬ 
note  of  his  address  was  universal  toleration  and  acceptance.  He  told  the  audience 
how  India,  even  in  olden  times,  had  given  shelter  to  the  religious  refugees  of 
other  lands — for  instance,  the  Israelites  and  the  Zoroastrians — and  he  quoted 
from  the  scriptures  the  following  two  passages  revealing  the  Hindu  spirit  of 
toleration: 

“As  different  streams,  having  their  sources  in  different  places,  all  mingle 


Vivekananda 


62 

their  water  in  the  sea,  so,  O  Lord,  the  different  paths  which  men  take  through 
different  tendencies,  various  though  they  appear,  crooked  or  straight,  all  lead 
to  Thee.” 

“Whosoever  comes  to  Me,  through  whatsoever  form,  I  reach  him.  All  men 
are  struggling  through  paths  which  in  the  end  lead  to  Me.” 

In  conclusion  he  pleaded  for  the  quick  termination  of  sectarianism,  bigotry, 
and  fanaticism. 

The  response  was  deafening  applause.  It  appeared  that  the  whole  audience 
had  been  patiently  awaiting  this  message  of  religious  harmony.  A  Jewish  intel¬ 
lectual  remarked  to  the  present  writer,  years  later,  that  after  hearing  Vive¬ 
kananda  he  realized  for  the  first  time  that  his  own  religion,  Judaism,  was  true, 
and  that  the  Swami  had  addressed  his  words  on  behalf  of  not  only  his  religion, 
but  all  religions  of  the  world.  Whereas  every  one  of  the  other  delegates  had 
spoken  for  his  own  ideal  or  his  own  sect,  the  Swami  had  spoken  about  God, 
who,  as  the  ultimate  goal  of  all  faiths,  is  their  inmost  essence.  And  he  had 
learnt  that  truth  at  the  feet  of  Sri  Ramakrishna,  who  had  taught  incessantly, 
from  his  direct  experience,  that  all  religions  are  but  so  many  paths  to  reach  the 
same  goal.  The  Swami  gave  utterance  to  the  yearning  of  the  modern  world  to 
break  down  the  barriers  of  caste,  colour,  and  creed  and  to  fuse  all  people  into 
one  humanity. 

Not  a  word  of  condemnation  for  any  faith,  however  crude  or  irrational,  fell 
from  his  lips.  He  did  not  believe  that  this  religion  or  that  religion  was  true  in 
this  or  that  respect;  to  him  all  religions  were  equally  effective  paths  to  lead 
their  respective  devotees,  with  diverse  tastes  and  temperaments,  to  the  same 
goal  of  perfection.  Years  before,  young  Narendra  had  condemned  before  his 
Master,  in  his  neophyte  zeal,  a  questionable  sect  that  indulged  in  immoral 
practices  in  the  name  of  religion,  and  Ramakrishna  had  mildly  rebuked  him, 
saying:  “Why  should  you  criticize  those  people?  Their  way,  too,  ultimately 
leads  to  God.  There  are  many  doors  to  enter  a  mansion.  The  scavenger  comes 
in  by  the  back  door.  You  need  not  use  it.” 

How  prophetic  were  the  Master's  words  that  his  Naren  would  one  day  shake 
the  world!  Mrs.  S.  K.  Blodgett,  who  later  became,  the  Swami's  hostess  in  Los 
Angeles,  said  about  her  impressions  of  the  Parliament:  “I  was  at  the  Parliament 
of  Religions  in  Chicago  in  1893.  When  that  young  man  got  up  and  said, 
'Sisters  and  Brothers  of  America,'  seven  thousand  people  rose  to  their  feet  as 
a  tribute  to  something  they  knew  not  what.  When  it  was  over  I  saw  scores  of 
women  walking  over  the  benches  to  get  near  him,  and  I  said  to  myself,  'Well, 
my  lad,  if  you  can  resist  that  onslaught  you  are  indeed  a  God!’  ” 

Swami  Vivekananda  addressed  the  Parliament  about  a  dozen  times.  His  out¬ 
standing  address  was  a  paper  on  Hinduism  in  which  he  discussed  Hindu  meta¬ 
physics,  psychology,  and  theology.  The  divinity  of  the  soul,  the  oneness  of 
existence,  the  non-duality  of  the  Godhead,  and  the  harmony  of  religions  were 
the  recurring  themes  of  his  message.  He  taught  that  the  final  goal  of  man  is  to 
become  divine  by  realizing  the  Divine  and  that  human  beings  are  the  children 
of  “Immortal  Bliss.” 

In  the  final  session  of  the  Parliament,  Swami  Vivekananda  said  in  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  his  speech:  “The  Christian  is  not  to  become  a  Hindu  or  a  Buddhist, 


Vivekananda 


63 


nor  is  a  Hindu  or  a  Buddhist  to  become  a  Christian.  But  each  must  assimilate 
the  spirit  of  the  others  and  yet  preserve  his  individuality  and  grow  according 
to  his  own  law  of  growth.  If  the  Parliament  of  Religions  has  shown  anything  to 
the  world,  it  is  this:  It  has  proved  to  the  world  that  holiness,  purity,  and  charity 
are  not  the  exclusive  possessions  of  any  church  in  the  world,  and  that  every 
system  has  produced  men  and  women  of  the  most  exalted  character.  In  the 
face  of  this  evidence,  if  anybody  dreams  of  the  exclusive  survival  of  his  own 
religion  and  the  destruction  of  the  others,  I  pity  him  from  the  bottom  of  my 
heart  and  point  out  to  him  that  upon  the  banner  of  every  religion  will  soon  be 
written,  in  spite  of  resistance:  ‘Help  and  not  Fight/  ‘Assimilation  and  not 
Destruction/  ‘Harmony  and  Peace  and  not  Dissension/  ” 

The  Parliament  of  Religions  offered  Swami  Vivekananda  the  long  desired 
opportunity  to  present  before  the  Western  world  the  eternal  and  universal 
truths  of  his  Aryan  ancestors.  And  he  rose  to  the  occasion.  As  he  stood  on  the 
platform  to  give  his  message,  he  formed,  as  it  were,  the  confluence  of  two  great 
streams  of  thought,  the  two  ideals  that  had  moulded  human  culture.  The  vast 
audience  before  him  represented  exclusively  the  Occidental  mind — young,  alert, 
restless,  inquisitive,  tremendously  honest,  well  disciplined,  and  at  ease  with 
the  physical  universe,  but  sceptical  about  the  profundities  of  the  supersensuous 
world  and  unwilling  to  accept  spiritual  truths  without  rational  proof.  And 
behind  him  lay  the  ancient  world  of  India,  with  its  diverse  religious  and  philo¬ 
sophical  discoveries,  with  its  saints  and  prophets  who  investigated  Reality 
through  self-control  and  contemplation,  unruffled  by  the  passing  events  of  the 
transitory  life  and  absorbed  in  contemplation  of  the  Eternal  Verities.  Vive- 
kananda’s  education,  upbringing,  personal  experiences,  and  contact  with  the 
God-man  of  modern  India  had  pre-eminently  fitted  him  to  represent  both 
ideals  and  to  remove  their  apparent  conflict. 

To  Vivekananda  the  religion  of  the  Hindus,  based  upon  the  teachings  of  the 
Vedas,  appeared  adequate  to  create  the  necessary  synthesis.  By  the  Vedas  he 
did  not  mean  any  particular  book  containing  the  words  of  a  prophet  or  deriving 
sanction  from  a  supernatural  authority,  but  the  accumulated  treasure  of  spiritual 
laws  discovered  by  various  Indian  seers  in  different  times.  Just  as  the  law  of 
gravitation  existed  before  its  discovery,  and  would  continue  to  exist  even  if  all 
humanity  forgot  it,  so  do  the  laws  that  govern  the  spiritual  world  exist  inde¬ 
pendently  of  our  knowledge  of  them.  The  moral,  ethical,  and  spiritual  relations 
between  soul  and  soul,  and  between  individual  spirits  and  the  Father  of  all 
spirits,  were  in  existence  before  their  discovery,  and  will  remain  even  if  we 
forget  them.  Regarding  the  universal  character  of  the  Hindu  faith  the  Swami 
said:  “From  the  high  spiritual  flights  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy,  of  which  the 
latest  discoveries  of  science  seem  like  echoes,  to  the  low  ideas  of  idolatry  with 
its  multifarious  mythology,  the  agnosticism  of  the  Buddhists,  and  the  atheism 
of  the  Jains,  each  and  all  have  a  place  in  Hindu  religion.” 

The  young,  unknown  monk  of  India  was  transformed  overnight  into  an  out¬ 
standing  figure  of  the  religious  world.  From  obscurity  he  leapt  to  fame.  His 
life-size  portraits  were  posted  in  the  streets  of  Chicago,  with  the  words  “The 
Monk  Vivekananda”  written  beneath  them,  and  many  passers-by  would  stop  to 
do  reverence  with  bowed  heads. 


64 


Vivekananda 


Dr.  J.  H.  Barrows,  the  President  of  the  Parliament  of  Religions,  said:  “Swami 
Vivekananda  exercised  a  wonderful  influence  over  his  auditors/’  and  Mr. 
Merwin-Marie  Snell  stated,  more  enthusiastically:  “By  far  the  most  important 
and  typical  representative  of  Hinduism  was  Swami  Vivekananda,  who,  in  fact, 
was  beyond  question  the  most  popular  and  influential  man  in  the  Parliament. 

.  .  .  He  was  received  with  greater  enthusiasm  than  any  other  speaker,  Christian 
or  pagan.  The  people  thronged  about  him  wherever  he  went  and  hung  with 
eagerness  on  his  every  word.  The  most  rigid  of  orthodox  Christians  say  of  him, 
‘He  is  indeed  a  prince  among  men!’  ” 

Newspapers  published  his  speeches  and  they  were  read  with  warm  interest 
all  over  the  country.  The  New  York  Herald  said:  “He  is  undoubtedly  the  great¬ 
est  figure  in  the  Parliament  of  Religions.  After  hearing  him  we  feel  how  foolish 
it  is  to  send  missionaries  to  this  learned  nation.”  The  Boston  Evening  Post  said: 
“He  is  a  great  favourite  at  the  Parliament  from  the  grandeur  of  his  sentiments 
and  his  appearance  as  well.  If  he  merely  crosses  the  platform  he  is  applauded; 
and  this  marked  approval  of  thousands  he  accepts  in  a  childlike  spirit  of  grati¬ 
fication  without  a  trace  of  conceit.  ...  At  the  Parliament  of  Religions  they  used 
to  keep  Vivekananda  until  the  end  of  the  programme  to  make  people  stay  till 
the  end  of  the  session.  .  .  .  The  four  thousand  fanning  people  in  the  Hall  of 
Columbus  would  sit  smiling  and  expectant,  waiting  for  an  hour  or  two  to  listen 
to  Vivekananda  for  fifteen  minutes.  The  chairman  knew  the  old  rule  of  keeping 
the  best  until  the  last.” 

It  is  one  of  the  outstanding  traits  of  Americans  to  draw  out  the  latent  great¬ 
ness  of  other  people.  America  discovered  Vivekananda  and  made  a  gift  of  him 
to  India  and  the  world. 

The  reports  of  the  Parliament  of  Religions  were  published  in  the  Indian 
magazines  and  newspapers.  The  Swami’s  vindication  of  the  Hindu  faith  filled 
with  pride  the  hearts  of  his  countrymen  from  Colombo  to  Almora,  from  Cal¬ 
cutta  to  Bombay.  Naturally  Calcutta,  his  birthplace,  and  Madras,  which  had 
taken  the  initiative  for  his  adventurous  trip  to  Chicago,  felt  the  greatest  jubila¬ 
tion.  Meetings  were  held  in  the  principal  cities  to  congratulate  him  on  his  tri¬ 
umph.  The  brother  monks  at  the  Baranagore  monastery  were  not,  at  first,  clear 
about  the  identity  of  Vivekananda.  A  letter  from  the  Swami,  six  months  after 
the  Parliament,  removed  all  doubts,  however,  and  how  proud  they  felt  at  the 
achievement  of  their  beloved  Naren! 

But  how  did  Vivekananda  himself  react  to  this  triumph,  which  had  been 
the  fulfilment  of  his  long  cherished  desire?  He  knew  that  his  solitary  life  as  a 
monk  in  constant  communion  with  God  was  at  an  end;  he  could  no  longer 
live  in  obscurity  with  his  dreams  and  visions.  Instead  of  dwelling  in  peace  and 
serenity,  he  was  thrown  into  the  vortex  of  a  public  career  with  its  ceaseless 
turmoil  and  demands.  When  he  returned  to  his  hotel  the  night  after  the  first 
meeting  of  the  Parliament,  he  wept  like  a  child. 

AFTER  THE  PARLIAMENT 

After  he  had  delivered  his  message  in  the  Parliament,  the  Swami  suffered  no 
longer  from  material  wants.  The  doors  of  the  wealthy  were  thrown  open.  Their 
lavish  hospitality  made  him  sick  at  heart  when  he  remembered  the  crushing 


Vivekananda 


65 


poverty  of  his  own  people.  His  anguish  became  so  intense  one  night  that  he 
rolled  on  the  floor,  groaning:  “O  Mother,  what  do  I  care  for  name  and  fame 
when  my  motherland  remains  sunk  in  utmost  poverty?  To  what  a  sad  pass  have 
we  poor  Indians  come  when  millions  of  us  die  for  want  of  a  handful  of  rice, 
and  here  they  spend  millions  of  rupees  upon  their  personal  comfort!  Who  will 
raise  the  masses  of  India?  Who  will  give  them  bread?  Show  me,  O  Mother, 
how  I  can  help  them.”  While  addressing  one  session  of  the  Parliament,  the 
Swami  had  said  that  what  India  needed  was  not  religion,  but  bread.  Now  he 
began  to  study  American  life  in  its  various  aspects,  especially  the  secret  of  the 
country’s  high  standard  of  living,  and  he  communicated  to  his  disciples  in 
India  his  views  on  the  promotion  of  her  material  welfare. 

Swami  Vivekananda  was  invited  by  a  lecture  bureau  to  tour  the  United 
States,  and  he  accepted  the  offer.  He  wanted  money  in  order  to  free  himself 
from  obligation  to  his  wealthy  friends  and  also  to  help  his  various  philanthropic 
and  religious  projects  in  India.  Further,  he  thought  that  through  a  lecture 
bureau  he  could  effectively  broadcast  his  ideas  all  over  the  American  continent 
and  thus  remove  from  people’s  minds  erroneous  notions  regarding  Hindu 
religion  and  society.  Soon  he  was  engaged  in  a  whirlwind  tour  covering  the 
larger  cities  of  the  East  and  the  Middle  West.  People  called  him  the  “cyclonic 
Hindu.”  He  visited,  among  other  places,  Iowa  City,  Des  Moines,  St.  Louis, 
Indianapolis,  Minneapolis,  Detroit,  Buffalo,  Hartford,  Boston,  Cambridge,  New 
York,  Baltimore,  and  Washington.  Cherishing  a  deep  affection  for  the  members 
of  the  Hale  family,  he  made  his  headquarters  with  George  W.  Hale  in  Chicago. 

But  his  path  was  not  always  strewn  with  rose  petals.  Vivekananda  was  an 
outspoken  man.  Whenever  he  found  in  American  society  signs  of  brutality, 
inhumanity,  pettiness,  arrogance,  and  ignorance  concerning  cultures  other 
than  its  own,  he  mercilessly  criticized  them.  Often  small-minded  people  asked 
him  irritating  questions  about  India,  based  upon  malicious  and  erroneous  re¬ 
ports,  and  the  Swami  fell  upon  them  like  a  thunderbolt.  “But  woe  to  the  man,” 
wrote  the  Iowa  State  Register ,  “who  undertook  to  combat  the  monk  on  his 
own  ground,  and  that  was  where  they  all  tried  it  who  tried  it  at  all.  His  replies 
came  like  flashes  of  lightning  and  the  venturesome  questioner  was  sure  to  be 
impaled  on  the  Indian’s  shining  intellectual  lance.  .  .  .  Vivekananda  and  his 
cause  found  a  place  in  the  hearts  of  all  true  Christians.” 

Many  Christian  ministers  became  his  warm  friends  and  invited  him  to  speak 
in  their  churches. 

Swami  Vivekananda  was  especially  bitter  about  false  Christianity  and  the 
religious  hypocrisy  of  many  Christian  leaders.  In  a  lecture  given  in  Detroit  he 
came  out  in  one  of  his  angriest  moods,  and  declared  in  the  course  of  his  speech: 

You  train  and  educate  and  clothe  and  pay  men  to  do  what? — to  come  over  to  my 
country  and  curse  and  abuse  all  my  forefathers,  my  religion,  my  everything.  They  walk 
near  a  temple  and  say,  “You  idolaters,  you  will  go  to  hell.”  But  the  Hindu  is  mild;  he 
smiles  and  passes  on,  saying,  “Let  the  fools  talk.”  And  then  you  who  train  men  to  abuse 
and  criticize,  if  I  just  touch  you  with  the  least  bit  of  criticism,  but  with  the  kindest  pur¬ 
pose,  you  shrink  and  cry:  “Do  not  touch  us!  We  are  Americans;  we  criticize,  curse,  and 
abuse  all  the  heathens  of  the  world,  but  do  not  touch  us,  we  are  sensitive  plants.”  And 
whenever  your  missionaries  criticize  us,  let  them  remember  this:  If  all  India  stands  up 


66 


Vivekananda 


and  takes  all  the  mud  that  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  Indian  Ocean  and  throws  it  up  against 
the  Western  countries,  it  will  not  be  doing  an  infinitesimal  part  of  what  you  are  doing 
to  us. 

Continuing,  the  Swami  said  that  the  military  conquests  of  the  Western 
nations  and  the  activities  of  the  Christian  missionaries,  strangely  enough,  often 
proceeded  side  by  side.  Most  people  were  converted  for  worldly  reasons.  But 
the  Swami  warned: 

Such  things  tumble  down;  they  are  built  upon  sand;  they  cannot  remain  long.  Every¬ 
thing  that  has  selfishness  for  its  basis,  competition  for  its  right  hand,  and  enjoyment  as 
its  goal,  must  die  sooner  or  later. 

If  you  want  to  live,  go  back  to  Christ.  You  are  not  Christians.  No,  as  a  nation  you  are 
not.  Go  back  to  Christ.  Go  back  to  him  who  had  nowhere  to  lay  his  head.  Yours  is  a 
religion  preached  in  the  name  of  luxury.  What  an  irony  of  fate!  Reverse  this  if  you  want 
to  live;  reverse  this.  You  cannot  serve  God  and  Mammon  at  the  same  time.  All  this 
prosperity — all  this  from  Christ?  Christ  would  have  denied  all  such  heresies.  If  you  can 
join  these  two,  this  wonderful  prosperity  with  the  ideal  of  Christ,  it  is  well;  but  if  you 
cannot,  better  go  back  to  him  and  give  up  these  vain  pursuits.  Better  be  ready  to  live 
in  rags  with  Christ  than  to  live  in  palaces  without  him. 

On  one  occasion  the  Swami  was  asked  to  speak  in  Boston  on  Ramakrishna, 
a  subject  dear  to  his  heart.  When  he  looked  at  the  audience — the  artificial  and 
worldly  crowd  of  people — and  contrasted  it  with  his  Master’s  purity  and  renun¬ 
ciation,  he  practically  dropped  the  subject  and  mercilessly  inveighed  against 
the  materialistic  culture  of  the  West.  The  audience  was  resentful  and  many 
left  the  meeting  in  an  angry  mood.  But  Vivekananda,  too,  had  his  lesson.  On 
returning  home  he  recalled  what  he  had  said,  and  wept.  His  Master  had  never 
uttered  a  word  of  condemnation  against  anybody,  even  the  most  wicked  person; 
yet  he,  while  talking  about  Ramakrishna,  had  criticized  these  good-hearted 
people  who  were  eager  to  learn  about  the  Master.  He  felt  that  he  was  unworthy 
of  Sri  Ramakrishna  and  resolved  not  to  discuss  him  in  public  or  even  to  write 
about  him  again. 

Swami  Vivekananda’s  outspoken  words  aroused  the  bitter  enmity  of  a  large 
section  of  the  Christian  missionaries  and  their  American  patrons,  and  also  of 
Christian  fanatics.  Filled  with  rancour  and  hatred,  these  began  to  vilify  him 
both  openly  and  in  private.  They  tried  to  injure  his  reputation  by  writing  false 
stories  traducing  his  character.  Some  of  the  Indian  delegates  to  the  Parliament, 
jealous  of  the  Swami’s  popularity  and  fame,  joined  in  the  vilification.  Mission¬ 
aries  working  in  India  and  some  of  the  Hindu  organizations  started  an  infamous 
campaign  against  the  Swami’s  work.  The  Theosophists  were  particularly  vin¬ 
dictive.  They  declared  that  the  Swami  was  violating  the  laws  of  monastic  life 
in  America  by  eating  forbidden  food  and  breaking  caste  laws. 

His  friends  and  disciples  in  India  were  frightened  and  sent  him  cuttings  from 
Indian  papers  containing  these  malicious  reports.  One  article  stated  that  one 
of  the  Swami’s  American  hostesses  had  had  to  dismiss  a  servant  girl  on  account 
of  the  Swami’s  presence  in  the  house.  But  the  lady  published  a  vehement  denial 
and  said  that  the  Swami  was  an  honoured  guest  in  her  home  and  would  always 
be  treated  with  affection  and  respect.  The  Swami  wrote  to  his  timorous  devotees 
in  India  concerning  a  particular  American  paper  that  had  criticized  him,  telling 


Vivekananda 


67 


them  that  it  was  generally  known  in  America  as  the  ‘‘blue-nosed  Presbyterian 
paper/’  that  no  educated  American  took  it  seriously,  and  that,  following  the 
well-known  Yankee  trick,  it  had  tried  to  gain  notoriety  by  attacking  a  man 
lionized  by  society.  He  assured  them  that  the  American  people  as  a  whole,  and 
many  enlightened  Christian  clergymen,  were  among  his  admiring  friends,  and 
he  asked  them  not  to  send  him  any  more  of  such  newspaper  trash  with  articles 
from  his  vilifiers.  He  told  them,  furthermore,  that  he  had  never  deviated  from 
the  two  basic  vows  of  the  monastic  life,  namely,  chastity  and  poverty,  and  that 
as  regards  other  things,  he  was  trying  to  adjust  himself  to  the  customs  of  the 
people  among  whom  he  lived. 

To  the  accusation  from  some  orthodox  Hindus  that  the  Swami  was  eating 
beef  and  other  forbidden  food  at  the  table  of  infidels,  he  retorted: 

Do  you  mean  to  say  I  am  born  to  live  and  die  as  one  of  those  caste-ridden,  super¬ 
stitious,  merciless,  hypocritical,  atheistic  cowards  that  you  only  find  among  the  educated 
Hindus?  I  hate  cowardice.  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  cowards.  I  belong  to  the  world 
as  much  as  to  India,  no  humbug  about  that.  What  country  has  a  special  claim  on  me? 
Am  I  a  nation’s  slave?  ...  I  see  a  greater  power  than  man  or  God  or  Devil  at  my  back. 
I  require  nobody’s  help.  I  have  been  all  my  life  helping  others. 

To  another  Indian  devotee  he  wrote  in  similar  vein: 

I  am  surprised  that  you  take  the  missionaries’  nonsense  so  seriously.  ...  If  the  people 
of  India  want  me  to  keep  strictly  to  my  Hindu  diet,  please  tell  them  to  send  me  a  cook 
and  money  enough  to  keep  him.  .  .  .  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  missionaries  tell  you  that 
I  have  ever  broken  the  two  great  vows  of  the  sannyasin — chastity  and  poverty — tell  them 
that  they  are  big  liars.  As  for  me,  mind  you,  I  stand  at  nobody’s  dictation,  and  no 
chauvinism  about  me.  ...  I  hate  cowardice;  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  cowards  or 
political  nonsense.  I  do  not  believe  in  any  politics.  God  and  truth  are  the  only  politics 
in  the  world;  everything  else  is  trash. 

Swami  Vivekananda  remained  unperturbed  by  opposition.  His  lectures,  in¬ 
tensely  religious  and  philosophical,  were  attended  everywhere  by  eminent 
people.  Many  came  to  him  for  private  instruction.  His  aim  was  to  preach  the 
eternal  truths  of  religion  and  to  help  sincere  people  in  moulding  their  spiritual 
life.  Very  soon  his  dauntless  spirit,  innate  purity,  lofty  idealism,  spiritual  per¬ 
sonality,  and  spotless  character  attracted  to  him  a  band  of  sincere  and  loyal 
American  disciples,  whom  he  began  to  train  as  future  Vedanta  workers  in 
America. 


AMERICA  AT  THE  TIME  OF  VIVEKANANDA 

It  must  be  said  to  the  credit  of  America  that  she  was  not  altogether  unpre¬ 
pared  to  receive  the  message  of  Vivekananda.  Certain  spiritual  ideas,  which 
were  congenial  for  the  reception  of  the  Vedantic  ideals  presented  by  the  Swami, 
had  already  begun  to  ferment  underneath  the  robust,  picturesque,  gay,  and 
dynamic  surface  of  American  life.  Freedom,  equality,  and  justice  had  always 
been  the  cherished  treasures  of  American  hearts.  To  these  principles,  which  the 
Americans  applied  in  politics  and  society  for  the  material  and  ethical  welfare  of 
men,  Swami  Vivekananda  gave  a  spiritual  basis  and  interpretation. 

Religion  had  played  an  important  part  from  the  very  beginning  of  American 


68 


Vivekananda 


Colonial  history.  The  pilgrims  who  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  “Mayflower 
and  landed  on  the  barren  coast  of  Cape  Cod  in  November  1620,  were  English 
people  who  had  first  left  England  and  gone  to  Holland  for  freedom  of  worship. 
Later  they  were  joined  by  other  dissenters  who  could  not  submit  to  the  restric¬ 
tions  placed  upon  their  religious  beliefs  by  the  English  rulers  of  the  time. 
These  were  the  forbears  of  the  sturdy,  religious-minded  New  Englanders  who, 
two  centuries  later,  became  the  leaders  of  the  intellectual  and  spiritual  culture 
of  America.  Swami  Vivekananda  found  among  their  descendants  many  of  his 
loyal  and  enthusiastic  followers. 

Both  the  Holy  Bible  and  the  philosophy  of  Locke  influenced  the  Bill  of 
Rights  and  the  American  Constitution.  Leaders  imbued  with  the  Christian 
ideal  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God  and  the  brotherhood  of  men  penned  the  second 
paragraph  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  which  clearly  set  forth  its 
political  philosophy,  namely,  the  equality  of  men  before  God,  the  state,  and 
society.  Thomas  Paine,  one  of  the  high  priests  of  the  American  Revolution, 
was  an  uncompromising  foe  of  tyranny,  and  an  upholder  of  human  freedom. 
The  same  passion  for  equality,  freedom,  justice,  enduring  peace,  and  righteous¬ 
ness  was  later  to  permeate  the  utterances  of  the  great  Lincoln. 

The  political  structure  of  America  shows  the  sagacity  and  lofty  idealism  of 
her  statesmen,  who  built  up  the  country  after  the  War  of  Independence.  The 
original  thirteen  colonies,  which  had  wrested  freedom  from  England,  gradually 
became  the  United  States  of  America.  The  architects  of  the  American  Govern¬ 
ment  might  have  created,  following  the  imperialistic  pattern  of  England,  an 
American  Empire,  with  the  original  thirteen  states  as  a  sort  of  mother  country 
and  the  rest  as  her  colonies.  But  instead,  the  newly  acquired  territories  received 
complete  equality  of  status.  It  may  also  be  mentioned  that,  with  the  exception 
of  the  Mexican  War  of  1845,  America  has  never  started  a  war. 

Within  a  hundred  years  of  her  gaining  independence,  America  showed 
unprecedented  material  prosperity.  The  country’s  vast  hidden  wealth  was  tapped 
by  European  immigrants,  who  brought  with  them  not  only  the  flavour  of  an 
older  civilization,  but  technical  skill,  indomitable  courage,  and  the  spirit  of 
adventure.  Scientists  and  technologists  flooded  the  country  with  new  inven¬ 
tions.  Steamboats,  a  network  of  railroads,  and  various  mechanical  appliances 
aided  in  the  creation  of  new  wealth.  Towns  grew  into  cities.  As  big  business 
concerns  expanded,  workmen  and  mechanics  formed  protective  organizations. 
Ambition  stirred  everywhere,  and  men’s  very  manners  changed  with  the  new 
haste  and  energy  that  swept  them  on. 

Material  prosperity  was  accompanied  by  a  new  awakening  of  men’s  minds 
and  consciousness.  Jails  were  converted  into  penitentiary  systems,  based  upon 
humanitarian  principles,  and  anti-slavery  societies  were  inaugurated.  During  the 
five  years  between  1850  and  1855  were  published  some  of  the  greatest  books 
in  American  literature,  hardly  surpassed  in  imaginative  vitality.  Democracy  was 
in  full  swing  and  it  was  the  people’s  day  everywhere.  The  crude  frontier  days 
were  fast  disappearing. 

The  Transcendentalist  Movement,  of  which  Emerson  was  the  leader,  with 
Thoreau  and  Alcott  as  his  associates,  brought  spiritual  India  into  the  swift 
current  of  American  life.  The  old  and  new  continents  had  not  been  altogether 


Vivekananda 


69 


strangers.  Columbus  had  set  out  to  find  the  short  route  to  India,  known  far 
and  wide  for  her  fabulous  wealth,  and  had  stumbled  upon  America  instead. 
The  chests  of  tea  of  the  Boston  Tea  Party,  which  set  off  the  War  of  Inde¬ 
pendence,  had  come  from  India.  Moreover,  the  victory  of  the  English  over 
the  French  in  the  eighteenth-century  colonial  wars  in  India  contributed  to  the 
success  of  the  American  colonists  in  their  struggle  for  freedom  begun  in  1775. 
And  finally,  Commodore  Perry  in  1853  made  it  possible  for  American  merchant 
ships  to  trade  with  the  Far  East  and  thus  visit  Indian  coastal  towns  on  their 
long  journeys. 

The  development  of  Emerson’s  innate  idealism  had  been  aided  by  the 
philosophy  of  Greece,  the  ethics  of  China,  the  poetry  of  the  Sufis,  and  the 
mysticism  of  India.  Emerson,  a  keen  student  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  was 
familiar  with  the  Upanishadic  doctrines  and  published  translations  of  religious 
and  philosophical  tracts  from  the  Oriental  languages.  His  beautiful  poem 
“Brahma”  and  his  essay  “The  Over-Soul”  show  clearly  his  indebtedness  to 
Hindu  spiritual  thought.  But  Emerson’s  spirit,  pre-eminently  ethical  and  intel¬ 
lectual,  could  not  grasp  the  highest  flights  of  Hindu  mysticism;  it  accepted  only 
what  was  in  harmony  with  a  somewhat  shallow  optimism.  Emerson’s  writings 
later  influenced  the  New  Thought  movement  and  Mary  Baker  Eddy’s  Christian 
Science. 

Thoreau,  Emerson’s  neighbour  for  twenty-five  years,  read  and  discussed  with 
him  in  great  detail  the  Hindu  religious  classics.  Thoreau  wrote:  “I  bathe  my 
intellect  in  the  stupendous  and  cosmogonal  philosophy  of  the  Upanishads  and 
the  Bhagavad  Gita,  in  comparison  with  which  our  modern  world  and  literature 
seem  puny  and  trivial.”  He  wanted  to  write  a  joint  Bible,  gathering  material 
from  the  Asiatic  scriptures,  and  took  for  his  motto  Ex  Oriente  Lux . 

Alcott  was  a  genuine  friend  of  Indian  culture.  He  was  instrumental  in  bring¬ 
ing  out  the  American  edition  of  Sir  Edwin  Arnold’s  The  Light  of  Asia,  and 
this  made  the  life  and  teachings  of  Buddha  accessible,  for  the  first  time,  to 
American  readers. 

The  Transcendental  Club,  founded  in  Concord,  near  Boston,  reached  its 
height  by  1840.  The  American  Oriental  Society  was  formed  in  1842,  with  aims 
similar  to  those  of  the  European  Oriental  societies. 

Walt  Whitman  (1819-1892),  a  contemporary  of  the  Concord  philosophers, 
seems  to  have  come  very  near  to  Vedantic  idealism.  There  is  no  reliable  evi¬ 
dence  to  show  that  Whitman  was  directly  influenced  by  Hindu  thought.  He 
is  reputed  to  have  denied  it  himself.  A  great  religious  individualist,  he  was  free 
from  all  church  conventions  and  creeds.  To  him,  religion  consisted  entirely  of 
inner  illumination,  “the  secret  silent  ecstasy.”  It  is  not  known  if  he  practised 
any  definite  religious  disciplines;  most  probably  he  did  not.  Yet  Swami  Vive¬ 
kananda  once  called  Whitman  “the  sannyasin  of  America.”  Leaves  of  Grass, 
which  Swami  Vivekananda  read,  breathes  the  spirit  of  identity  with  all  forms 
of  life,  and  Whitman’s  “Song  of  the  Open  Road”  is  full  of  the  sentiments  that 
were  nearest  to  the  heart  of  Vivekananda.  Here,  for  example,  are  three  stanzas: 

I  inhale  great  draughts  of  space; 

The  east  and  the  west  are  mine,  and  the  north  and  the  south  are  mine. 


70 


Vivekananda 


I  am  larger,  better  than  I  thought; 

I  did  not  know  I  held  so  much  goodness. 

#  #  # 

Allons!  We  must  not  stop  here! 

However  sweet  these  laid-up  stores — however  convenient  this  dwelling,  we  cannot  remain 
here; 

However  shelter’d  this  port,  and  however  calm  these  waters,  we  must  not  anchor  here; 
However  welcome  the  hospitality  that  surrounds  us,  we  are  permitted  to  receive  it  but  a 
little  while. 

#  *  * 

Allons!  Be  not  detain’d! 

Let  the  paper  remain  on  the  desk  unwritten,  and  the  book  on  the  shelf  unopen’d! 

Let  the  tools  remain  in  the  workshop!  let  the  money  remain  unearn’d! 

Let  the  school  stand!  mind  not  the  cry  of  the  teacher! 

Let  the  preacher  preach  in  the  pulpit!  let  the  lawyer  plead  in  the  court,  and  the  judge 
expound  the  law. 

The  marriage  of  East  and  West  dreamt  of  by  Emerson  and  Thoreau  was  not 
consummated  for  several  reasons.  The  Gold  Rush  of  1849,  to  California,  had 
turned  people’s  attention  in  other  directions.  Then  had  come  the  Civil  War, 
in  which  brother  had  fought  brother  and  men’s  worst  passions  had  been  let 
loose.  Lastly,  the  development  of  science  and  technology  had  brought  about 
a  great  change  in  people’s  outlook,  intensifying  their  desire  for  material 
prosperity. 

The  publication  of  Darwin’s  Origin  of  Species  in  1859  changed  the  Welt¬ 
anschauung  of  the  Western  world,  and  its  repercussions  were  felt  more  in  the 
New  World  than  in  Europe.  Within  a  decade,  intellectual  people  gave  up 
their  belief  in  the  Biblical  story  of  creation  and  did  not  hesitate  to  trace  man’s 
origin  back  to  an  apelike  ancestor,  and  beyond  that  to  a  primordial  protoplasmic 
atomic  globule.  The  implications  of  evolution  were  incorporated  into  every 
field  of  thought — law,  history,  economics,  sociology,  philosophy,  religion,  and 
art;  transcendentalism  was  replaced  by  empiricism,  instrumentalism,  and  prag¬ 
matism.  The  American  life-current  thus  was  turned  into  a  new  channel.  When 
America  had  been  comparatively  poor  she  had  cherished  her  spiritual  heritage. 
In  the  midst  of  her  struggle  for  existence  she  had  preserved  her  spiritual  sen¬ 
sitivity.  But  in  the  wake  of  the  Civil  War  the  desire  to  possess  “bigger  and 
better  things”  cast  its  spell  everywhere.  Big  utilities  and  corporations  came  into 
existence;  the  spiritual  and  romantic  glow  of  the  frontier  days  degenerated  into 
the  sordidness  of  competitive  materialistic  life,  while  the  unceasing  flow  of 
crude  immigrants  from  Europe  made  difficult  the  stabilization  of  American 
culture. 

Emerson  was  disillusioned  by  the  aftermath  of  the  Civil  War.  He  had  hoped 
“that  in  the  peace  after  such  a  war,  a  great  expansion  would  follow  in  the  mind 
of  the  country,  grand  views  in  every  direction — true  freedom  in  politics,  in 
religion,  in  social  science,  in  thought.  But  the  energy  of  the  nation  seems  to 
have  expended  itself  in  the  war.” 

Walt  Whitman  was  even  more  caustic.  He  wrote  bitterly: 

Society  in  the  States  is  cramped,  crude,  superstitious,  and  rotten.  .  .  .  Never  was  there, 
perhaps,  more  hollowness  of  heart  than  at  present,  and  here  in  the  United  States.  Gen- 


Vivekananda 


71 


uine  belief  seems  to  have  left  us.  .  .  .  The  great  cities  reek  with  respectable,  as  much  as 
non-respectable,  robbery  and  scoundrelism.  In  fashionable  life,  flippancy,  tepid  amours, 
weak  infidelism,  small  aims,  or  no  aims  at  all,  only  to  kill  time.  ...  I  say  that  our  New 
World  Democracy,  however  great  a  success  in  uplifting  the  masses  out  of  their  sloughs 
in  materialistic  development,  and  in  a  certain  highly  deceptive  superficial  popular  intel¬ 
lectuality,  is  so  far  an  almost  complete  failure  in  its  social  aspects.  In  vain  do  we  march 
with  unprecedented  strides  to  empire  so  colossal,  outvying  the  antique,  beyond  Alex¬ 
ander’s,  beyond  the  proudest  sway  of  Rome.  In  vain  we  annexed  Texas,  California,  Alaska, 
and  reach  north  for  Canada  or  south  for  Cuba.  It  is  as  if  we  were  somehow  being 
endowed  with  a  vast  and  thoroughly  appointed  body,  and  left  with  little  or  no  soul. 

But  the  material  prosperity  or  the  triumph  of  science  could  not  destroy  the 
innate  idealism  of  the  American  mind.  It  remained  hidden  like  embers  under 
ashes.  Thoughtful  Americans  longed  for  a  philosophy  which,  without  going 
counter  to  the  scientific  method,  would  show  the  way  to  a  larger  vision  of  life, 
harmonizing  the  diverse  claims  of  science,  the  humanities,  and  mystical  experi¬ 
ence.  Now  the  time  was  ripe  for  the  fulfilment  of  Thoreau’s  dream  of  the 
marriage  of  East  and  West,  a  real  synthesis  of  science  and  religion.  And  to 
bring  this  about,  no  worthier  person  could  have  been  found  than  Swami  Vive¬ 
kananda  of  India.  This  accounts  for  the  spontaneous  welcome  received  by  this 
representative  of  Hinduism,  who  brought  to  America  an  ancient  and  yet  dynamic 
philosophy  of  life. 


VEDANTA  IN  AMERICA 

After  the  meetings  of  the  Parliament  of  Religions  were  concluded,  Swami 
Vivekananda,  as  already  noted,  undertook  a  series  of  apostolic  campaigns  in  order 
to  sow  the  seed  of  the  Vedantic  truths  in  the  ready  soil  of  America.  Soon  he 
discovered  that  the  lecture  bureau  was  exploiting  him.  Further,  he  did  not  like 
its  method  of  advertisement.  He  was  treated  as  if  he  were  the  chief  attraction 
of  a  circus.  The  prospectus  included  his  portrait,  with  the  inscription,  pro¬ 
claiming  his  cardinal  virtues:  “An  Orator  by  Divine  Right;  a  Model  Repre¬ 
sentative  of  his  Race;  a  Perfect  Master  of  the  English  Language;  the  Sensation 
of  the  World’s  Fair  Parliament.”  It  also  described  his  physical  bearing,  his 
height,  the  colour  of  his  skin,  and  his  clothing.  The  Swami  felt  disgusted  at 
being  treated  like  a  patent  medicine  or  an  elephant  in  a  show.  So  he  severed 
his  relationship  with  the  bureau  and  arranged  his  own  lectures  himself.  He 
accepted  invitations  from  churches,  clubs,  and  private  gatherings,  and  travelled 
extensively  through  the  Eastern  and  Midwestern  states  of  America,  delivering 
twelve  to  fourteen  or  more  lectures  a  week. 

People  came  in  hundreds  and  in  thousands.  And  what  an  assorted  audience 
he  had  to  face!  There  came  to  his  meetings  professors  from  universities,  ladies 
of  fine  breeding,  seekers  of  truth,  and  devotees  of  God  with  childlike  faith. 
But  mixed  with  these  were  charlatans,  curiosity-seekers,  idlers,  and  vagabonds. 
It  is  not  true  that  he  met  everywhere  with  favourable  conditions.  Leon  Lands- 
berg,  one  of  the  Swami’s  American  disciples,  thus  described  Vivekananda’s 
tribulations  of  those  days: 

The  Americans  are  a  receptive  nation.  That  is  why  the  country  is  a  hotbed  of  all  kinds 
of  religious  and  irreligious  monstrosities.  There  is  no  theory  so  absurd,  no  doctrine  so 


72 


Vivekananda 


irrational,  no  claim  so  extravagant,  no  fraud  so  transparent,  but  can  find  their  numerous 
believers  and  a  ready  market.  To  satisfy  this  craving,  to  feed  the  credulity  of  the  people, 
hundreds  of  societies  and  sects  are  born  for  the  salvation  of  the  world,  and  to  enable  the 
prophets  to  pocket  $25  to  $100  initiation  fees.  Hobgoblins,  spooks,  mahatmas,  and  new 
prophets  were  rising  every  day.  In  this  bedlam  of  religious  cranks,  the  Swami  appeared 
to  teach  the  lofty  religion  of  the  Vedas,  the  profound  philosophy  of  Vedanta,  the  sub¬ 
lime  wisdom  of  the  ancient  rishis.  The  most  unfavourable  environment  for  such  a  task! 

The  Swami  met  with  all  kinds  of  obstacles.  The  opposition  of  fanatical 
Christian  missionaries  was,  of  course,  one  of  these.  They  promised  him  help  if 
he  only  would  preach  their  brand  of  Christianity.  When  the  Swami  refused, 
they  circulated  all  sorts  of  filthy  stories  about  him,  and  even  succeeded  in  per¬ 
suading  some  of  the  Americans  who  had  previously  invited  him  to  be  their 
guest,  to  cancel  the  invitations.  But  Vivekananda  continued  to  preach  the 
religion  of  love,  renunciation,  and  truth  as  taught  by  Christ,  and  to  show  him 
the  highest  veneration  as  a  Saviour  of  mankind.  How  significant  were  his  words: 
“It  is  well  to  be  born  in  a  church,  but  it  is  terrible  to  die  there!”  Needless  to 
say,  he  meant  by  the  word  church  all  organized  religious  institutions.  How  like 
a  thunderbolt  the  words  fell  upon  the  ears  of  his  audience  when  one  day  he 
exclaimed:  “Christ,  Buddha,  and  Krishna  are  but  waves  in  the  Ocean  of  Infinite 
Consciousness  that  I  am!” 

Then  there  were  the  leaders  of  the  cranky,  selfish,  and  fraudulent  organiza¬ 
tions,  who  tried  to  induce  the  Swami  to  embrace  their  cause,  first  by  promises 
of  support,  and  then  by  threats  of  injuring  him  if  he  refused  to  ally  himself 
with  them.  But  he  could  be  neither  bought  nor  frightened — “the  sickle 
had  hit  on  a  stone,”  as  the  Polish  proverb  says.  To  all  these  propositions  his 
only  answer  was:  “I  stand  for  Truth.  Truth  will  never  ally  itself  with  falsehood. 
Even  if  all  the  world  should  be  against  me,  Truth  must  prevail  in  the  end.” 

But  the  more  powerful  enemies  he  had  to  face  were  among  the  so-called 
free-thinkers,  embracing  the  atheists,  materialists,  agnostics,  rationalists,  and 
others  of  similar  breed  who  opposed  anything  associated  with  God  or  religion. 
Thinking  that  they  would  easily  crush  his  ancient  faith  by  arguments  drawn 
from  Western  philosophy  and  science,  they  organized  a  meeting  in  New  York 
and  invited  the  Swami  to  present  his  views. 

“I  shall  never  forget  that  memorable  evening,”  wrote  an  American  disciple, 
“when  the  Swami  appeared  single-handed  to  face  the  forces  of  materialism, 
arrayed  in  the  heaviest  armour  of  law,  and  reason,  and  logic,  and  common 
sense,  of  matter,  and  force,  and  heredity,  and  all  the  stock  phrases  calculated 
to  awe  and  terrify  the  ignorant.  Imagine  their  surprise  when  they  found  that, 
far  from  being  intimidated  by  these  big  words,  he  proved  himself  a  master  in 
wielding  their  own  weapons,  and  as  familiar  with  the  arguments  of  materialism 
as  with  those  of  Advaita  philosophy.  He  showed  them  that  their  much  vaunted 
Western  science  could  not  answer  the  most  vital  questions  of  life  and  being, 
that  their  immutable  laws,  so  much  talked  of,  had  no  outside  existence  apart 
from  the  human  mind,  that  the  very  idea  of  matter  was  a  metaphysical  con¬ 
ception,  and  that  it  was  much  despised  metaphysics  upon  which  ultimately 
rested  the  very  basis  of  their  materialism.  With  an  irresistible  logic  he  demon¬ 
strated  that  their  knowledge  proved  itself  incorrect,  not  by  comparison  with 


Vivekananda 


73 


that  which  was  true,  but  by  the  very  laws  upon  which  it  depended  for  its  basis; 
that  pure  reason  could  not  help  admitting  its  own  limitations  and  pointed  to 
something  beyond  reason;  and  that  rationalism,  when  carried  to  its  last  conse¬ 
quences,  must  ultimately  land  us  at  something  which  is  above  matter,  above 
force,  above  sense,  above  thought,  and  even  consciousness,  and  of  which  all 
these  are  but  manifestations/' 

As  a  result  of  his  explaining  the  limitations  of  science,  a  number  of  people 
from  the  group  of  free-thinkers  attended  the  Swami’s  meeting  the  next  day  and 
listened  to  his  uplifting  utterances  on  God  and  religion. 

What  an  uphill  work  it  was  for  Swami  Vivekananda  to  remove  the  ignorance, 
superstition,  and  perverted  ideas  about  religion  in  general  and  Hinduism  in 
particular!  No  wonder  he  sometimes  felt  depressed.  In  one  of  these  moods  he 
wrote  from  Detroit,  on  March  15,  1894,  to  the  Hale  sisters  in  Chicago: 

But  I  do  not  know — I  have  become  very  sad  in  my  heart  since  I  am  here.  I  do  not 
know  why.  I  am  wearied  of  lecturing  and  all  that  nonsense.  This  mixing  with  hundreds 
of  human  animals,  male  and  female,  has  disturbed  me.  I  will  tell  you  what  is  to  my 
taste.  I  cannot  write — cannot  speak — but  I  can  think  deep,  and  when  I  am  heated  can 
speak  fire.  But  it  should  be  to  a  select  few — a  very  select  few.  And  let  them  carry  and 
sow  my  ideas  broadcast  if  they  will — not  I.  It  is  only  a  just  division  of  labour.  The  same 
man  never  succeeded  in  thinking  and  in  casting  his  thoughts  all  around.  Such  thoughts 
are  not  worth  a  penny.  ...  I  am  really  not  “cyclonic’'  at  all — far  from  it.  What  I  want  is 
not  here — nor  can  I  longer  bear  this  cyclonic  atmosphere.  Calm,  cool,  nice,  deep,  pene¬ 
trating,  independent,  searching  thought — a  few  noble,  pure  mirrors  which  will  reflect  it 
back,  catch  it  until  all  of  them  sound  in  unison.  Let  others  throw  it  to  the  outside  world 
if  they  will.  This  is  the  way  to  perfection — to  be  perfect,  to  make  perfect  a  few  men 
and  women.  My  idea  of  doing  good  is  this — to  evolve  a  few  giants,  and  not  to  strew 
pearls  to  the  swine  and  lose  time,  breath,  and  energy.  .  .  .  Well,  I  do  not  care  for  lec¬ 
turing  any  more.  It  is  too  disgusting  to  bring  me  to  suit  anybody’s  or  any  audience's  fad. 

Swami  Vivekananda  became  sick  of  what  he  termed  “the  nonsense  of  public 
life  and  newspaper  blazoning.” 

The  Swami  had  sincere  admirers  and  devotees  among  the  Americans,  who 
looked  after  his  comforts,  gave  him  money  when  he  lacked  it,  and  followed  his 
instruction.  He  was  particularly  grateful  to  American  women,  and  wrote  many 
letters  to  his  friends  in  India  paying  high  praise  to  their  virtues. 

In  one  letter  he  wrote:  “Nowhere  in  the  world  are  women  like  those  of  this 
country.  How  pure,  independent,  self-relying,  and  kind-hearted!  It  is  the  women 
who  are  the  life  and  soul  of  this  country.  All  learning  and  culture  are  centred 
in  them.” 

In  another  letter:  “[Americans]  look  with  veneration  upon  women,  who  play 
a  most  prominent  part  in  their  lives.  Here  this  form  of  worship  has  attained  its 
perfection — this  is  the  long  and  short  of  it.  I  am  almost  at  my  wit’s  end  to 
see  the  women  of  this  country.  They  are  Lakshmi,  the  Goddess  of  Fortune, 
in  beauty,  and  Sarasvati,  the  Goddess  of  Learning,  in  virtues — they  are  the 
Divine  Mother  incarnate.  If  I  can  raise  a  thousand  such  Madonnas — incarna¬ 
tions  of  the  Divine  Mother — in  our  country  before  I  die,  I  shall  die  in  peace. 
Then  only  will  our  countrymen  become  worthy  of  their  name.” 


74 


Vivekananda 


Perhaps  his  admiration  reached  its  highest  pitch  in  a  letter  to  the  Maharaja 
of  Khetri,  which  he  wrote  in  1894: 

American  women!  A  hundred  lives  would  not  be  sufficient  to  pay  my  deep  debt  of 
gratitude  to  you!  Last  year  I  came  to  this  country  in  summer,  a  wandering  preacher  of 
a  far  distant  country,  without  name,  fame,  wealth,  or  learning  to  recommend  me — 
friendless,  helpless,  almost  in  a  state  of  destitution;  and  zvmcrican  women  befriended  me, 
gave  me  shelter  and  food,  took  me  to  their  homes,  and  treated  me  as  their  own  son,  their 
own  brother.  They  stood  as  my  friends  even  when  their  own  priests  were  trying  to  per¬ 
suade  them  to  give  up  the  “dangerous  heathen” — even  when,  day  after  day,  their  best 
friends  had  told  them  not  to  stand  by  this  “unknown  foreigner,  maybe  of  dangerous 
character.”  But  they  are  better  judges  of  character  and  soul — for  it  is  the  pure  mirror 
that  catches  the  reflection. 

And  how  many  beautiful  homes  I  have  seen,  how  many  mothers  whose  purity  of 
character,  whose  unselfish  love  for  their  children,  are  beyond  expression,  how  many 
daughters  and  pure  maidens,  “pure  as  the  icicle  on  Diana’s  temple” — and  withal  much 
culture,  education,  and  spirituality  in  the  highest  sense!  Is  America,  then,  only  full  of 
wingless  angels  in  the  shape  of  women?  There  are  good  and  bad  everywhere,  true — but 
a  nation  is  not  to  be  judged  by  its  weaklings,  called  the  wicked,  for  they  are  only  the 
weeds  which  lag  behind,  but  by  the  good,  the  noble,  and  the  pure,  who  indicate  the 
national  life-current  to  be  flowing  clear  and  vigorous. 

And  how  bitter  the  Swami  felt  when  he  remembered  the  sad  plight  of  the 
women  of  India!  He  particularly  recalled  the  tragic  circumstances  under  which 
one  of  his  own  sisters  had  committed  suicide.  He  often  thought  that  the  misery 
of  India  was  largely  due  to  the  ill-treatment  the  Hindus  meted  out  to  their 
womenfolk.  Part  of  the  money  earned  by  his  lectures  was  sent  to  a  foundation 
for  Hindu  widows  at  Baranagore.  He  also  conceived  the  idea  of  sending  to 
India  women  teachers  from  the  West  for  the  intellectual  regeneration  of  Hindu 
women. 

Swami  Vivekananda  showed  great  respect  for  the  fundamentals  of  American 
culture.  He  studied  the  country’s  economic  policy,  industrial  organizations, 
public  instruction,  and  its  museums  and  art  galleries,  and  wrote  to  India  en¬ 
thusiastically  about  them.  He  praised  highly  the  progress  of  science,  hygiene, 
institutions,  and  social  welfare  work.  He  realized  that  such  noble  concepts  as  the 
divinity  of  the  soul  and  the  brotherhood  of  men  were  mere  academic  theories  in 
present-day  India,  whereas  America  showed  how  to  apply  them  in  life.  He  felt 
indignant  when  he  compared  the  generosity  and  liberality  of  the  wealthy  men  of 
America  in  the  cause  of  social  service,  with  the  apathy  of  the  Indians  as  far  as 
their  own  people  were  concerned. 

“No  religion  on  earth,”  he  wrote  angrily,  “preaches  the  dignity  of  humanity 
in  such  a  lofty  strain  as  Hinduism,  and  no  religion  on  earth  treads  upon  the 
necks  of  the  poor  and  the  low  in  such  a  fashion  as  Hinduism.  Religion  is  not 
at  fault,  but  it  is  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees.” 

How  poignant  must  have  been  his  feelings  when  he  remembered  the  iniqui¬ 
ties  of  the  caste-system!  “India’s  doom  was  sealed,”  he  wrote,  “the  very  day 
they  invented  the  word  mlechcha 8  and  stopped  from  communion  with  others.” 
When  he  saw  in  New  York  a  millionaire  woman  sitting  side  by  side  in  a  tram- 

8  The  non-Hindu,  with  whom  all  social  intercourse  is  forbidden. 


Vivekananda 


75 


car  with  a  negress  with  a  wash-basket  on  her  lap,  he  was  impressed  with  the 
democratic  spirit  of  the  Americans.  He  wanted  in  India  “an  organization  that 
will  teach  the  Hindus  mutual  help  and  appreciation”  after  the  pattern  of 
Western  democracies. 

Incessantly  he  wrote  to  his  Indian  devotees  about  the  regeneration  of  the 
masses.  In  a  letter  dated  1894  he  said: 

Let  each  one  of  us  pray,  day  and  night,  for  the  downtrodden  millions  in  India,  who 
are  held  fast  by  poverty,  priestcraft,  and  tyranny — pray  day  and  night  for  them.  I  care 
more  to  preach  religion  to  them  than  to  the  high  and  the  rich.  I  am  no  metaphysician, 
no  philosopher,  nay,  no  saint.  But  I  am  poor,  I  love  the  poor.  .  .  .  Who  feels  in  India 
for  the  three  hundred  millions  of  men  and  women  sunken  for  ever  in  poverty  and  igno¬ 
rance?  Where  is  the  way  out?  Who  feels  for  them?  Let  these  people  be  your  God — 
think  of  them,  work  for  them,  pray  for  them  incessantly — the  Lord  will  show  you  the 
way.  Him  I  call  a  mahatma,  a  noble  soul,  whose  heart  bleeds  for  the  poor;  otherwise  he 
is  a  duratma,  a  wicked  soul.  ...  So  long  as  the  millions  live  in  hunger  and  ignorance, 
I  hold  every  man  a  traitor  who,  having  been  educated  at  their  expense,  pays  not  the  least 
heed  to  them.  .  .  .  We  are  poor,  my  brothers,  we  are  nobodies,  but  such  have  always 
been  the  instruments  of  the  Most  High. 

Never  did  he  forget,  in  the  midst  of  the  comforts  and  luxuries  of  America, 
even  when  he  was  borne  on  the  wings  of  triumph  from  one  city  to  another, 
the  cause  of  the  Indian  masses,  whose  miseries  he  had  witnessed  while  wander¬ 
ing  as  an  unknown  monk  from  the  Himalayas  to  Cape  Comorin.  The  prosperity 
of  the  new  continent  only  stirred  up  in  his  soul  deeper  commiseration  for  his 
own  people.  He  saw  with  his  own  eyes  what  human  efforts,  intelligence,  and 
earnestness  could  accomplish  to  banish  from  society  poverty,  superstition, 
squalor,  disease,  and  other  handicaps  of  human  well-being.  On  August  20,  1893, 
he  wrote  to  instil  courage  into  the  depressed  hearts  of  his  devotees  in  India: 

Gird  up  your  loins,  my  boys!  I  am  called  by  the  Lord  for  this.  .  .  .  The  hope  lies  in 
you — in  the  meek,  the  lowly,  but  the  faithful.  Feel  for  the  miserable  and  look  up  for 
help — it  shall  come.  I  have  travelled  twelve  years  with  this  load  in  my  heart  and  this 
idea  in  my  head.  I  have  gone  from  door  to  door  of  the  so-called  “rich  and  great.”  With 
a  bleeding  heart  I  have  crossed  half  the  world  to  this  strange  land,  seeking  help.  The 
Lord  is  great.  I  know  He  will  help  me.  I  may  perish  of  cold  and  hunger  in  this  land,  but 
I  bequeath  to  you  young  men  this  sympathy,  this  struggle  for  the  poor,  the  ignorant, 
the  oppressed.  .  .  .  Go  down  on  your  faces  before  Him  and  make  a  great  sacrifice,  the 
sacrifice  of  a  whole  life  for  them,  for  whom  He  comes  from  time  to  time,  whom  He 
loves  above  all — the  poor,  the  lowly,  the  oppressed.  Vow,  then,  to  devote  your  whole 
lives  to  the  cause  of  these  three  hundred  millions,  going  down  and  down  every  day. 
Glory  unto  the  Lord!  We  will  succeed.  Hundreds  will  fall  in  the  struggle — hundreds  will 
be  ready  to  take  it  up.  Faith — sympathy,  fiery  faith  and  fiery  sympathy!  Life  is  nothing, 
death  is  nothing — hunger  nothing,  cold  nothing.  Glory  unto  the  Lord!  March  on,  the 
Lord  is  our  General.  Do  not  look  back  to  see  who  falls — forward — onward! 

Swami  Vivekananda  was  thoroughly  convinced  by  his  intimate  knowledge  of 
the  Indian  people  that  the  life-current  of  the  nation,  far  from  being  extinct, 
was  only  submerged  under  the  dead  weight  of  ignorance  and  poverty.  India 
still  produced  great  saints  whose  message  of  the  Spirit  was  sorely  needed  by 
the  Western  world.  But  the  precious  jewels  of  spirituality  discovered  by  them 


76 


Vivekananda 


were  hidden,  in  the  absence  of  a  jewel-box,  in  a  heap  of  filth.  The  West  had 
created  the  jewel-box,  in  the  form  of  a  healthy  society,  but  it  did  not  have  the 
jewels.  Further,  it  took  him  no  long  time  to  understand  that  a  materialistic 
culture  contained  within  it  the  seeds  of  its  own  destruction.  Again  and  again 
he  warned  the  West  of  its  impending  danger.  The  bright  glow  on  the  Western 
horizon  might  not  be  the  harbinger  of  a  new  dawn;  it  might  very  well  be  the 
red  flames  of  a  huge  funeral  pyre.  The  Western  world  was  caught  in  the  maze 
of  its  incessant  activity — interminable  movement  without  any  goal.  The  hanker¬ 
ing  for  material  comforts,  without  a  higher  spiritual  goal  and  a  feeling  of 
universal  sympathy,  might  flare  up  among  the  nations  of  the  West  into 
jealousy  and  hatred,  which  in  the  end  would  bring  about  their  own  destruction. 

Swami  Vivekananda  was  a  lover  of  humanity.  Man  is  the  highest  manifesta¬ 
tion  of  God,  and  this  God  was  being  crucified  in  different  ways  in  the  East 
and  the  West.  Thus  he  had  a  double  mission  to  perform  in  America.  He  wanted 
to  obtain  from  the  Americans  money,  scientific  knowledge,  and  technical  help 
for  the  regeneration  of  the  Indian  masses,  and,  in  turn,  to  give  to  the  Americans 
the  knowledge  of  the  Eternal  Spirit  to  endow  their  material  progress  with 
significance.  No  false  pride  could  prevent  him  from  learning  from  America 
the  many  features  of  her  social  superiority;  he  also  exhorted  the  Americans 
not  to  allow  racial  arrogance  to  prevent  them  from  accepting  the  gift  of  spiritual¬ 
ity  from  India.  Through  this  policy  of  acceptance  and  mutual  respect  he  dreamt 
of  creating  a  healthy  human  society  for  the  ultimate  welfare  of  man’s  body 
and  soul. 


VARIOUS  EXPERIENCES  AS  A  TEACHER 

The  year  following  the  Parliament  of  Religions  the  Swami  devoted  to  address¬ 
ing  meetings  in  the  vast  area  spreading  from  the  Mississippi  to  the  Atlantic. 
In  Detroit  he  spent  six  weeks,  first  as  a  guest  of  Mrs.  John  Bagley,  widow  of 
the  former  Governor  of  Michigan,  and  then  of  Thomas  W.  Palmer,  President 
of  the  World’s  Fair  Commission,  formerly  a  United  States  Senator  and  Amer¬ 
ican  Minister  to  Spain.  Mrs.  Bagley  spoke  of  the  Swami’s  presence  at  her  house 
as  a  “continual  benediction.”  It  was  in  Detroit  that  Miss  Greenstidel  first  heard 
him  speak.  She  later  became,  under  the  name  of  Sister  Christine,  one  of  the 
most  devoted  disciples  of  the  Swami  and  a  collaborator  of  Sister  Nivedita  in 
her  work  in  Calcutta  for  the  educational  advancement  of  Indian  women. 

After  Detroit,  he  divided  his  time  between  Chicago,  New  York,  and  Boston, 
and  during  the  summer  of  1894  addressed,  by  invitation,  several  meetings  of 
the  “Humane  Conference”  held  at  Greenacre,  Massachusetts.  Christian  Sci¬ 
entists,  spiritualists,  faith-healers,  and  groups  representing  similar  views  partici¬ 
pated  in  the  Conference. 

The  Swami,  in  the  course  of  a  letter  to  the  Hale  sisters  of  Chicago,  wrote 
on  July  31,  1894,  with  his  usual  humour  about  the  people  who  attended  the 
meetings: 

They  have  a  lively  time  and  sometimes  all  of  them  wear  what  you  call  your  scientific 
dress  the  whole  day.  They  have  lectures  almost  every  day.  One  Mr.  Colville  from  Boston 
is  here.  He  speaks  every  day,  it  is  said,  under  spirit  control.  The  editor  of  the  Universal 
Truth  from  the  top  floor  of  Jimmy  Mills  has  settled  herself  down  here.  She  is  conducting 


Vivekananda 


77 


religious  services  and  holding  classes  to  heal  all  manner  of  diseases,  and  very  soon  I  expect 
them  to  be  giving  eyes  to  the  blind,  etc.,  etc.  After  all,  it  is  a  queer  gathering.  They  do  not 
care  much  about  social  laws  and  are  quite  free  and  happy.  .  .  . 

There  is  a  Mr.  Wood  of  Boston  here,  who  is  one  of  the  great  lights  of  your  sect.  But 
he  objects  to  belonging  to  the  sect  of  Mrs.  Whirlpool.9  So  he  calls  himself  a  mental 
healer  of  metaphysical,  chemico,  physical-religioso,  what-not,  etc. 

Yesterday  there  was  a  tremendous  cyclone  which  gave  a  good  “treatment”  to  the  tents. 
The  big  tent  under  which  they  held  the  lectures  developed  so  much  spirituality  under 
the  treatment  that  it  entirely  disappeared  from  mortal  gaze,  and  about  two  hundred 
chairs  were  dancing  about  the  grounds  under  spiritual  ecstasy.  Mrs.  Figs  of  Mills 
Company  gives  a  class  every  morning,  and  Mrs.  Mills  is  jumping  all  about  the  place. 
They  are  all  in  high  spirits.  I  am  especially  glad  for  Cora,  for  she  suffered  a  good  deal 
last  winter  and  a  little  hilarity  would  do  her  good.  You  would  be  astounded  with  the 
liberty  they  enjoy  in  the  camps,  but  they  are  very  good  and  pure  people — a  little  erratic, 
that  is  all. 

Regarding  his  own  work  at  Greenacre,  the  Swami  wrote  in  the  same  letter: 

The  other  night  the  camp  people  all  went  to  sleep  under  a  pine  tree  under  which  I 
sit  every  morning  a  la  India  and  talk  to  them.  Of  course  I  went  with  them  and  we  had 
a  nice  night  under  the  stars,  sleeping  on  the  lap  of  Mother  Earth,  and  I  enjoyed  every 
bit  of  it.  I  cannot  describe  to  you  that  night’s  glories — after  the  year  of  brutal  life  that 
I  have  led,  to  sleep  on  the  ground,  to  meditate  under  the  tree  in  the  forest!  The  inn 
people  are  more  or  less  well-to-do,  and  the  camp  people  are  healthy,  young,  sincere,  and 
holy  men  and  women.  I  teach  them  all  Sivoham,  Sivoham — “I  am  Siva,  I  am  Siva” — 
and  they  all  repeat  it,  innocent  and  pure  as  they  are,  and  brave  beyond  all  bounds,  and 
I  am  so  happy  and  glorified. 

Thank  God  for  making  me  poor!  Thank  God  for  making  these  children  in  the  tents 
poor!  The  dudes  and  dudines  are  in  the  hotel,  but  iron-bound  nerves,  souls  of  triple 
steel,  and  spirits  of  fire  are  in  the  camp.  If  you  had  seen  them  yesterday,  when  the  rain 
was  falling  in  torrents  and  the  cyclone  was  overturning  everything — hanging  on  to  their 
tent-strings  to  keep  them  from  being  blown  off,  and  standing  on  the  majesty  of  their 
souls,  these  brave  ones — it  would  have  done  your  hearts  good.  I  would  go  a  hundred 
miles  to  see  the  like  of  them.  Lord  bless  them!  .  .  . 

Never  be  anxious  for  me  for  a  moment.  I  will  be  taken  care  of,  and  if  not,  I  shall 
know  my  time  has  come — and  pass  out.  .  .  .  Now  good  dreams,  good  thoughts  for  you. 
You  are  good  and  noble.  Instead  of  materializing  the  spirit,  i.e.  dragging  the  spiritual  to 
the  material  plane  as  these  fellers  do,  convert  matter  into  spirit — catch  a  glimpse  at 
least,  every  day,  of  that  world  of  infinite  beauty  and  peace  and  purity,  the  spiritual, 
and  try  to  live  in  it  day  and  night.  Seek  not,  touch  not  with  your  toes,  anything  which 
is  uncanny.  Let  your  souls  ascend  day  and  night  like  an  unbroken  string  unto  the  feet 
of  the  Beloved,  whose  throne  is  in  your  own  heart,  and  let  the  rest  take  care  of  them¬ 
selves,  i.e.  the  body  and  everything  else.  Life  is  an  evanescent,  floating  dream;  youth 
and  beauty  fade.  Say  day  and  night:  “Thou  art  my  father,  my  mother,  my  husband, 
my  love,  my  Lord,  my  God — I  want  nothing  but  Thee,  nothing  but  Thee,  nothing  but 
Thee.  Thou  in  me,  I  in  Thee — I  am  Thee,  Thou  art  me.”  Wealth  goes,  beauty  vanishes, 
life  flies,  powers  fly — but  the  Lord  abideth  for  ever,  love  abideth  for  ever.  If  there  is  glory 
in  keeping  the  machine  in  good  trim,  it  is  more  glorious  to  withhold  the  soul  from 
suffering  with  the  body.  That  is  the  only  demonstration  of  your  being  “not  matter” — 
by  letting  matter  alone. 

Stick  to  God.  Who  cares  what  comes,  in  the  body  or  anywhere?  Through  the  terrors 

9  A  reference  to  Mrs.  Mary  Baker  Eddy,  the  founder  of  Christian  Science. 


78 


Vivekananda 


of  evil,  say,  "My  God,  my  Love!”  Through  the  pangs  of  death,  say,  "My  God,  my 
Love!”  Through  all  the  evils  under  the  sun,  say:  "My  God,  my  Love!  Thou  art  here, 

I  see  Thee.  Thou  art  with  me,  I  feel  Thee.  I  am  Thine,  take  me.  I  am  not  the  world  s, 
but  Thine — leave  Thou  not  me.”  Do  not  go  for  glass  beads,  leaving  the  mine  of  dia¬ 
monds.  This  life  is  a  great  chance.  What!  Seekest  thou  the  pleasures  of  this  world?  He 
is  the  fountain  of  all  bliss.  Seek  the  highest,  aim  for  the  highest,  and  you  shall  reach 
the  highest. 

At  Greenacre  the  Swami  became  a  friend  of  Dr.  Lewis  G.  Janes,  Director  of 
the  School  of  Comparative  Religions  organized  by  the  Greenacre  Conference, 
and  President  of  the  Brooklyn  Ethical  Association.  The  following  autumn  he 
lectured  in  Baltimore  and  Washington. 

During  the  Swami’s  visit  in  New  York  he  was  the  guest  of  friends,  mostly  rich 
ladies  of  the  metropolitan  city.  Lie  had  not  yet  started  any  serious  work  there. 
Soon  he  began  to  feel  a  sort  of  restraint  put  upon  his  movements.  Very  few 
of  his  wealthy  friends  understood  the  true  import  of  his  message;  they  were 
interested  in  him  as  a  novelty  from  India.  Also  to  them  he  was  the  man  of  the 
hour.  They  wanted  him  to  mix  with  only  the  exclusive  society  of  “the  right 
people.”  He  chafed  under  their  domination  and  one  day  cried:  “Siva!  Siva! 
Has  it  ever  come  to  pass  that  a  great  work  has  been  grown  by  the  rich?  It 
is  brain  and  heart  that  create,  and  not  purse.”  He  wanted  to  break  away  from 
their  power  and  devote  himself  to  the  training  of  some  serious  students  in  the 
spiritual  life.  He  was  fed  up  with  public  lectures;  now  he  became  eager  to  mould 
silently  the  characters  of  individuals.  He  could  no  longer  bear  the  yoke  of 
money  and  all  the  botheration  that  came  in  its  train.  He  would  live  simply 
and  give  freely,  like  the  holy  men  of  India.  Soon  an  opportunity  presented 
itself. 

Dr.  Lewis  Janes  invited  the  Swami  to  give  a  series  of  lectures  on  the  Hindu 
religion  before  the  Brooklyn  Ethical  Association.  On  the  evening  of  December 
31,  1894,  he  gave  his  first  lecture,  and  according  to  the  report  of  the  Brooklyn 
Standard ,  the  enthusiastic  audience,  consisting  of  doctors  and  lawyers  and 
judges  and  teachers,  remained  spellbound  by  his  eloquent  defence  of  the  religion 
of  India.  They  all  acknowledged  that  Vivekananda  was  even  greater  than  his 
fame.  At  the  end  of  the  meeting  they  made  an  insistent  demand  for  regular 
classes  in  Brooklyn,  to  which  the  Swami  agreed.  A  series  of  class  meetings 
was  held  and  several  public  lectures  were  given  at  the  Pouch  Mansion,  where 
the  Ethical  Association  held  its  meetings.  These  lectures  constituted  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  permanent  work  in  America  which  the  Swami  secretly  desired. 

Soon  after,  several  poor  but  earnest  students  rented  for  the  Swami  some 
unfurnished  rooms  in  a  poor  section  of  New  York  City.  He  lived  in  one  of 
them.  An  ordinary  room  on  the  second  floor  of  the  lodging-house  was  used 
for  the  lectures  and  classes.  The  Swami  when  conducting  the  meetings  sat 
on  the  floor,  while  the  ever  more  numerous  auditors  seated  themselves  as  best 
they  could,  utilizing  the  marble-topped  dresser,  the  arms  of  the  sofa,  and  even 
the  corner  wash-stand.  The  door  was  left  open  and  the  overflow  filled  the  hall 
and  sat  on  the  stairs.  The  Swami,  like  a  typical  religious  teacher  in  India,  felt 
himself  in  his  own  element.  The  students,  forgetting  all  the  inconveniences, 


Vivekananda  79 

hung  upon  every  word  uttered  from  the  teacher’s  deep  personal  experiences 
or  his  wide  range  of  knowledge. 

The  lectures,  given  every  morning  and  several  evenings  a  week,  were  free. 
The  rent  was  paid  by  the  voluntary  subscriptions  of  the  students,  and  the 
deficit  was  met  by  the  Swami  himself,  through  the  money  he  earned  by  giving 
secular  lectures  on  India.  Soon  the  meeting-place  had  to  be  removed  downstairs 
to  occupy  an  entire  parlour  floor. 

He  began  to  instruct  several  chosen  disciples  in  jnana-yoga  in  order  to  clarify 
their  intellects  regarding  the  subtle  truths  of  Vedanta,  and  also  in  raja-yoga  to 
teach  them  the  science  of  self-control,  concentration,  and  meditation.  He  was 
immensely  happy  with  the  result  of  his  concentrated  work.  He  enjoined  upon 
these  students  to  follow  strict  disciplines  regarding  food,  choosing  only  the 
simplest.  The  necessity  of  chastity  was  emphasized,  and  they  were  warned 
against  psychic  and  occult  powers.  At  the  same  time  he  broadened  their  intel¬ 
lectual  horizon  through  the  teachings  of  Vedantic  universality.  Daily  he  medi¬ 
tated  with  the  serious  students.  Often  he  would  lose  all  bodily  consciousness  and, 
like  Sri  Ramakrishna,  have  to  be  brought  back  to  the  knowledge  of  the  world 
through  the  repetition  of  certain  holy  words  that  he  had  taught  his  disciples. 

It  was  sometime  about  June  1895  when  Swami  Vivekananda  finished  writing 
his  famous  book  Raj a-Yoga,  which  attracted  the  attention  of  the  Harvard 
philosopher  William  fames  and  was  later  to  rouse  the  enthusiasm  of  Tolstoy. 
The  book  is  a  translation  of  Patanjali’s  Yoga  aphorisms,  the  Swami  adding 
his  own  explanations;  the  introductory  chapters  written  by  him  are  especially 
illuminating.  Patanjali  expounded,  through  these  aphorisms,  the  philosophy 
of  Yoga,  the  main  purpose  of  which  is  to  show  the  way  of  the  soul’s  attaining 
freedom  from  the  bondage  of  matter.  Various  methods  of  concentration  are 
discussed.  The  book  well  served  two  purposes.  First,  the  Swami  demonstrated 
that  religious  experiences  could  stand  on  the  same  footing  as  scientific  truths, 
being  based  on  experimentation,  observation,  and  verification.  Therefore  genu¬ 
ine  spiritual  experiences  must  not  be  dogmatically  discarded  as  lacking  rational 
evidence.  Secondly,  the  Swami  explained  lucidly  various  disciplines  of  concen¬ 
tration,  with  the  warning,  however,  that  they  should  not  be  pursued  without 
the  help  of  a  qualified  teacher. 

Miss  S.  Ellen  Waldo  of  Brooklyn,  a  disciple  of  the  Swami,  was  his  amanu¬ 
ensis.  She  thus  described  the  manner  in  which  he  dictated  the  book: 

“In  delivering  his  commentaries  on  the  aphorisms,  he  would  leave  me  waiting 
while  he  entered  into  deep  states  of  meditation  or  self-contemplation,  to  emerge 
therefrom  with  some  luminous  interpretation.  I  had  always  to  keep  the  pen 
dipped  in  the  ink.  He  might  be  absorbed  for  long  periods  of  time,  and  then 
suddenly  his  silence  would  be  broken  by  some  eager  expression  or  some  long, 
deliberate  teaching.” 

SWAMI  VIVEKANANDA  AT  THOUSAND  ISLAND  PARK 

By  the  middle  of  the  year  1895  the  Swami  was  completely  exhausted.  The 
numerous  classes  and  lectures,  the  private  instruction,  the  increasing  correspond¬ 
ence,  and  the  writing  of  Raja-Yoga  had  tired  him  both  physically  and  mentally. 
It  was  a  herculean  task  to  spread  the  message  of  Hinduism  in  an  alien  land 


80 


Vivekananda 


and  at  the  same  time  to  mould  the  lives  of  individuals  according  to  the  highest 
ideal  of  renunciation.  Besides  there  were  annoyances  from  zealous  but  well- 
meaning  friends,  especially  women.  Some  suggested  that  he  should  take  elocu¬ 
tion  lessons,  some  urged  him  to  dress  fashionably  in  order  to  influence  society 
people,  others  admonished  him  against  mixing  with  all  sorts  of  people.  At  times 
he  would  be  indignant  and  say:  “Why  should  I  be  bound  down  with  all  this 
nonsense?  I  am  a  monk  who  has  realized  the  vanity  of  all  earthly  nonsense! 
I  have  no  time  to  give  my  manners  a  finish.  I  cannot  find  time  enough  to  give  my 
message.  I  will  give  it  after  my  own  fashion.  Shall  I  be  dragged  down  into  the 
narrow  limits  of  your  conventional  life?  Never!”  Again,  he  wrote  to  a  devotee: 
“I  long,  oh,  I  long  for  my  rags,  my  shaven  head,  my  sleep  under  the  trees, 
and  my  food  from  begging.” 

The  Swami  needed  rest  from  his  strenuous  work,  and  accepted  the  invitation 
of  his  devoted  friend  Francis  H.  Leggett  to  come  to  his  summer  camp  at  Percy, 
New  Hampshire,  and  rest  in  the  silence  of  the  pine  woods.  In  the  meantime 
Miss  Elizabeth  Dutcher,  one  of  his  students  in  New  York,  cordially  asked  the 
Swami  to  take  a  vacation  in  her  summer  cottage  at  Thousand  Island  Park 
on  the  St.  Lawrence  River.  The  Swami  gratefully  accepted  both  invitations. 

About  his  life  at  the  camp,  he  wrote  to  a  friend  on  June  7,  1895:  “It  gives 
me  a  new  lease  of  life  to  be  here.  I  go  into  the  forest  alone  and  read  my  Gita 
and  am  quite  happy.”  After  a  short  visit  at  Percy,  he  arrived  in  June  at  Thousand 
Island  Park,  where  he  spent  seven  weeks.  This  proved  to  be  a  momentous  period 
in  his  life  in  the  Western  world. 

When  the  students  who  had  been  attending  Swami  Vivekananda’s  classes  in 
New  York  heard  of  Miss  Dutcher’s  proposal,  they  were  immensely  pleased, 
because  they  did  not  want  any  interruption  of  their  lessons.  The  Swami,  too^ 
after  two  years’  extensive  work  in  America,  had  become  eager  to  mould  the 
spiritual  life  of  individual  students  and  to  train  a  group  that  would  carry  on 
his  work  in  America  in  the  future.  He  wrote  to  one  of  his  friends  that  he 
intended  to  manufacture  “a  few  yogis”  from  the  materials  of  the  classes.  He 
wanted  only  those  to  follow  him  to  Thousand  Island  Park  who  were  com¬ 
pletely  earnest  in  their  practice  of  spiritual  disciplines,  and  he  said  that  he 
would  gladly  recognize  these  as  his  disciples. 

By  a  singular  coincidence  just  twelve  disciples  were  taught  by  him  at  the 
summer  retreat,  though  all  were  not  there  the  full  seven  weeks;  ten  was  the 
largest  number  present  at  any  one  time.  Two,  Mme.  Marie  Louise  and  Mr.  Leon 
Landsberg,  were  initiated  at  Thousand  Island  Park  into  the  monastic  life.  The 
former,  French  by  birth  but  a  naturalized  American,  a  materialist  and  socialist, 
a  fearless,  progressive  woman  worker  known  to  the  press  and  platform,  was 
given  the  name  Abhayananda.  The  latter,  a  Russian  Jew  and  member  of  the 
staff  of  a  prominent  New  York  newspaper,  became  known  as  Kripananda.  Both 
took  the  vows  of  poverty  and  chastity. 

In  many  respects  the  sojourn  in  Miss  Dutcher’s  cottage  was  ideal  for  the 
Swami’s  purpose.  Here,  to  this  intimate  group,  he  revealed  brilliant  flashes  of 
illumination,  lofty  flights  of  eloquence,  and  outpourings  of  the  most  profound 
wisdom.  The  whole  experience  was  reminiscent  of  the  Dakshineswar  days 


Vivekananda  81 

when  the  Swami,  as  the  young  Narendra,  had  been  initiated  into  the  mysteries 
of  the  spiritual  life  at  the  feet  of  his  Master,  Ramakrishna. 

Thousand  Island  Park,  near  the  western  tip  of  Wellesley  Island,  the  second 
largest  of  the  seventeen  hundred  islands  in  the  St.  Lawrence  River,  has  for  its 
setting  one  of  the  scenic  show-places  of  America.  A  prosperous  village  during 
the  last  part  of  the  nineteenth  century,  it  was,  at  the  time  of  the  Swami’s  visit, 
a  stronghold  of  orthodox  Methodist  Christianity.  The  local  tabernacle,  where 
celebrated  preachers  were  invited  to  conduct  the  divine  service  on  Sunday 
mornings,  attracted  people  from  the  neighbouring  islands.  Since  secular  activi¬ 
ties  were  not  allowed  on  the  Sabbath,  the  visitors  would  arrive  at  Thousand 
Island  Park  the  previous  day  and  spend  the  night  camping  out.  No  such  pro¬ 
fanities  as  public  drinking,  gambling,  or  dancing  were  allowed  in  the  summer 
resort — a  rule  that  is  still  enforced  half  a  century  later.  Only  people  of  serious 
mind  went  there  for  their  vacation. 

Miss  Butcher's  cottage10  was  ideally  located  on  a  hill,  which  on  the  north 
and  west  sloped  down  towards  the  river.  It  commanded  a  grand  view  of  many 
distant  islands,  the  town  of  Clayton  on  the  American  mainland,  and  the 
Canadian  shores  to  the  north.  At  night  the  houses  and  hotels  were  brightly 
illuminated  by  Chinese  lanterns. 

Miss  Dutcher,  an  artist,  had  built  her  cottage  literally  “on  a  rock,"  with  huge 
boulders  lying  all  around.  It  was  surrounded  by  rock-gardens  with  bright-coloured 
flowers.  At  that  time  the  trees  at  the  base  of  the  hill  had  not  grown  high; 
people  from  the  village  often  visited  the  upstairs  porch  to  survey  the  magnificent 
sweep  of  the  river. 

After  inviting  the  Swami,  Miss  Dutcher  added  a  new  wing  to  the  cottage 
for  his  accommodation.  This  wing,  three  storeys  high,  stood  on  a  steep  slope 
of  rock,  like  a  great  lantern-tower  with  windows  on  three  sides.  The  room  at 
the  top  was  set  apart  exclusively  for  the  Swami’s  use;  the  lowest  room  was 
occupied  by  a  student;  the  room  between,  with  large  windows,  and  several  doors 
opening  on  the  main  part  of  the  house,  was  used  as  the  Swami’s  classroom.  Miss 
Dutcher  thoughtfully  added  an  outside  stairway  to  the  Swami’s  room  so  that 
he  might  go  in  and  out  without  being  noticed  by  the  others. 

On  the  roofed-in  porch  upstairs,  extending  along  the  west  side  of  the  cottage, 
the  students  met  the  Swami  for  his  evening  talks.  There,  at  one  end,  close  to 
the  door  of  his  room,  he  would  take  his  seat  and  commune  with  his  pupils 
both  in  silence  and  through  the  spoken  word.  In  the  evening  the  cottage  was 
bathed  in  perfect  stillness  except  for  the  murmur  of  insects  and  the  whisper 
of  the  wind  through  the  leaves.  The  house  being  situated,  as  it  were,  among 
the  tree-tops,  a  breeze  always  relieved  the  summer  heat.  The  centre  of  the  village 
was  only  a  five  minutes’  walk  from  the  cottage,  and  yet,  on  account  of  the 
woods  around  it,  not  a  single  house  could  be  seen.  Many  of  the  islands  that 
dotted  the  river  were  visible  in  the  distance  and,  especially  in  the  evening, 

10  The  cottage,  which  was  acquired  by  the  Ramakrishna-Vivekananda  Center  of  New 
York  in  December  1947  and  extensively  restored  without  interfering  with  the  original 
design,  is  now  used  as  a  summer  retreat  for  Swamis  of  the  Ramakrishna  Order.  It  has 
been  dedicated  as  “Vivekananda  Cottage’’  and  Swami  Vivekananda’s  room  has  been  set 
apart  as  a  shrine  for  the  devotions  of  the  inmates. 


82 


Vivekananda 


appeared  like  a  picture.  The  glow  of  the  sunset  on  the  St.  Lawrence  was  breath¬ 
taking  in  its  beauty,  and  the  moon  at  night  was  mirrored  in  the  shining  waters 
beneath. 

In  this  ideal  retreat,  “the  world  forgetting,  by  the  world  forgot,”  the  devoted 
students  spent  seven  weeks  with  their  beloved  teacher,  listening  to  his  words 
of  wisdom  and  receiving  his  silent  benediction.  Immediately  after  the  evening 
meal  they  would  assemble  on  the  upstairs  porch.  Soon  the  Swami  would  come 
from  his  room  and  take  his  seat.  Two  hours  and  often  much  longer  would  be 
spent  together.  One  night,  when  the  moon  was  almost  full,  he  talked  to  them 
until  it  set  below  the  western  horizon,  both  the  teacher  and  the  students  being 
unaware  of  the  passage  of  time.  During  these  seven  weeks  the  Swami’s  whole 
heart  was  in  his  work  and  he  taught  like  one  inspired. 

Miss  Dutcher,  his  hostess,  was  a  conscientious  little  woman  and  a  staunch 
Methodist.  When  the  Swami  arrived  at  the  house,  he  saw  on  the  walls  of  his 
living  quarters  scrolls  bearing  the  words  “Welcome  to  Vivekananda”  painted 
in  bold  letters.  But  as  the  teaching  began,  Miss  Dutcher  often  felt  distressed 
by  the  Swamf  s  revolutionary  ideas.  All  her  ideals,  her  values  of  life,  her  concepts 
of  religion,  were,  it  seemed  to  her,  being  destroyed.  Sometimes  she  did  not  appear 
for  two  or  three  days.  “Don’t  you  see?”  the  Swami  said.  “This  is  not  an  ordinary 
illness.  It  is  the  reaction  of  the  body  against  the  chaos  that  is  going  on  in  her 
mind.  She  cannot  bear  it.” 

The  most  violent  attack  came  one  day  after  a  timid  protest  on  her  part 
against  something  he  had  told  them  in  the  class.  “The  idea  of  duty  is  the 
midday  sun  of  misery,  scorching  the  very  soul,”  he  had  said.  “Is  it  not  our 
duty — ”  she  had  begun,  but  got  no  farther.  For  once  the  great  free  soul  broke 
all  bounds  in  his  rebellion  against  the  idea  that  anyone  should  dare  bind  with 
fetters  the  soul  of  man.  Miss  Dutcher  was  not  seen  for  some  days. 

Referring  to  the  students  who  had  gathered  around  the  Swami,  a  village 
shopkeeper  said  to  a  new  arrival  who  inquired  for  the  cottage,  “Yes,  there  are 
some  queer  people  living  up  on  the  hill;  among  them  there  is  a  foreign  looking 
gentleman.”  A  young  girl  of  sixteen,  living  with  her  family  at  the  foot  of  the 
hill,  one  day  expressed  the  desire  to  talk  to  the  Swami.  “Don’t  go  near  him,” 
her  mother  said  sternly.  “He  is  a  heathen.”  Mr.  Tom  Mitchell,  a  carpenter 
who  helped  to  restore  the  cottage  for  the  Ramakrishna-Vivekananda  Center  in 
1948,  and  had  originally  built  the  Swami’s  quarters  in  1895,  told  the  present 
writer  that  he  had  read  the  Swami’s  lectures  in  Chicago  from  the  newspapers 
long  before  his  arrival  at  the  island. 

The  students  wanted,  at  first,  to  live  as  a  community  without  servants,  each 
doing  a  share  of  the  work.  Nearly  all  of  them,  however,  were  unaccustomed 
to  housework  and  found  it  uncongenial.  The  result  was  amusing;  as  time  went 
on  it  threatened  to  become  disastrous.  When  the  tension  became  too  great, 
the  Swami  would  say  with  utmost  sweetness,  “Today,  I  shall  cook  for  you.” 
At  this  Landsberg  would  ejaculate,  in  an  aside,  “Heaven  save  us!”  By  way 
of  explanation  he  declared  that  in  New  York,  whenever  the  Swami  cooked, 
he,  Landsberg,  would  tear  his  hair,  because  it  meant  that  afterwards  every  dish 
in  the  house  required  washing.  After  a  few  days  an  outsider  was  engaged  to  help 
with  the  housework. 


Vivekananda 


83 


Swami  Vivekananda  started  his  class  at  Thousand  Island  Park  on  Wednes¬ 
day,  June  19.  Not  all  the  students  had  arrived.  But  his  heart  was  set  on  his 
work;  so  he  commenced  at  once  with  the  three  or  four  who  were  with  him. 
After  a  short  meditation,  he  opened  with  the  Gospel  according  to  Saint  John, 
from  the  Bible,  saying  that  since  the  students  were  all  Christians,  it  was  proper 
that  he  should  begin  with  the  Christian  scriptures.  As  the  classes  went  on,  he 
taught  from  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  the  Upanishads,  the  Vedanta  Sutras,  the  Bhakti 
Sutras  of  Narada,  and  other  Hindu  scriptures.  He  discussed  Vedanta  in  its  three 
aspects:  the  non-dualism  of  Sankara,  the  qualified  non-dualism  of  Ramanuja, 
and  the  dualism  of  Madhva.  Since  the  subtleties  of  Sankara  appeared  difficult 
to  the  students,  Ramanuja  remained  the  favourite  among  them.  The  Swami 
also  spoke  at  length  about  Sri  Ramakrishna,  of  his  own  daily  life  with  the  Mas¬ 
ter,  and  of  his  struggles  with  the  tendency  to  unbelief  and  agnosticism.  He  told 
stories  from  the  inexhaustible  storehouse  of  Hindu  mythology  to  illustrate  his 
abstruse  thoughts. 

The  ever  recurring  theme  of  his  teaching  was  God-realization.  He  would 
always  come  back  to  the  one,  fundamental,  vital  point:  “Find  God.  Nothing 
else  matters.”  He  emphasized  morality  as  the  basis  of  the  spiritual  life.  With¬ 
out  truth,  non-injury,  continence,  non-stealing,  cleanliness,  and  austerity,  he 
repeated,  there  could  be  no  spirituality.  The  subject  of  continence  always  stirred 
him  deeply.  Walking  up  and  down  the  room,  getting  more  and  more  excited, 
he  would  stop  before  someone  as  if  there  were  no  one  else  present.  “Don’t 
you  see,”  he  would  say  eagerly,  “there  is  a  reason  why  chastity  is  insisted  on  in 
all  monastic  orders?  Spiritual  giants  are  produced  only  where  the  vow  of  chastity 
is  observed.  Don’t  you  see  there  must  be  a  reason?  There  is  a  connexion  between 
chastity  and  spirituality.  The  explanation  is  that  through  prayer  and  meditation 
the  saints  have  transmuted  the  most  vital  force  in  the  body  into  spiritual  energy. 
In  India  this  is  well  understood  and  yogis  do  it  consciously.  The  force  so  trans¬ 
muted  is  called  ojas,  and  it  is  stored  up  in  the  brain.  It  has  been  lifted  from  the 
lowest  centre  to  the  highest.  ‘And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto 
me.’  ”  He  would  plead  with  the  students  as  if  to  beg  them  to  act  upon  this 
teaching  as  something  most  precious.  Further,  they  could  not  be  the  disciples 
he  required  if  they  were  not  established  in  chastity.  He  demanded  a  conscious 
transmutation.  “The  man  who  has  no  temper  has  nothing  to  control,”  he  said. 
“I  want  a  few,  five  or  six,  who  are  in  the  flower  of  their  youth.” 

He  would  frequently  exhort  the  students  to  attain  freedom.  As  the  words 
came  in  torrents  from  the  depths  of  his  soul,  the  atmosphere  would  be  charged 
with  the  yearning  to  break  free  from  the  bondage  of  the  body,  a  degrading 
humiliation.  As  he  touched  upon  “this  indecent  clinging  to  life,”  the  students 
would  feel  as  if  the  curtain  that  hid  the  region  beyond  life  and  death  were  lifted 
for  them,  and  they  would  long  for  that  glorious  freedom.  “Azad!  Azad!  the  Free! 
the  Free!”  he  would  cry,  pacing  back  and  forth  like  a  caged  lion;  but  for  him 
the  bars  of  the  cage  were  not  of  iron,  but  of  bamboo.  “Let  us  not  be  caught 
this  time,”  would  be  his  refrain  on  other  occasions. 

Some  of  these  precious  talks  were  noted  down  by  his  disciple  Miss  S.  Ellen 
Waldo  and  later  published  as  Inspired  Talks.  Students  of  Swami  Vivekananda 
will  for  ever  remain  indebted  to  her  for  faithfully  preserving  his  immortal  words, 


84 


Vivekananda 


and  the  title  of  this  book  was  well  chosen,  for  they  were  indeed  inspired.  One 
day  Miss  Waldo  was  reading  her  notes  to  some  tardy  arrivals  in  the  cottage 
while  the  Swami  strode  up  and  down  the  floor,  apparently  unconscious  of  what 
was  going  on.  After  the  travellers  had  left  the  room,  the  Swami  turned  to  Miss 
Waldo  and  said:  “How  could  you  have  caught  my  thought  and  words  so  per¬ 
fectly?  It  was  as  if  I  heard  myself  speaking/’ 

During  these  seven  weeks  of  teaching  the  Swami  was  most  gentle  and  lovable. 
He  taught  his  disciples  as  Sri  Ramakrishna  had  taught  him  at  Dakshineswar:  the 
teaching  was  the  outpouring  of  his  own  spirit  in  communion  with  himself. 
The  Swami  said  later  that  he  was  at  his  best  at  Thousand  Island  Park.  The  ideas 
he  cherished  and  expressed  there  grew,  during  the  years  that  followed,  into 
institutions,  both  in  India  and  abroad. 

The  Swami’s  one  consuming  passion,  during  this  time,  was  to  show  his 
students  the  way  to  freedom.  “Ah,”  he  said  one  day,  with  touching  pathos,  “if 
I  could  only  set  you  free  with  a  touch!”  Two  students  arrived  at  the  Park  one 
dark  and  rainy  night.  One  of  them  said,  “We  have  come  to  you  as  we  would 
go  to  Jesus  if  he  were  still  on  the  earth  and  ask  him  to  teach  us.”  The  Swami 
looked  at  them  kindly  and  gently  said,  “If  I  only  possessed  the  power  of  the 
Christ  to  set  you  free!”  No  wonder  that  Miss  Waldo  one  day  exclaimed,  “What 
have  we  ever  done  to  deserve  all  this?”  And  so  felt  the  others  also. 

One  cannot  but  be  amazed  at  the  manifestation  of  Swami  Vivekananda’s 
spiritual  power  at  Thousand  Island  Park.  Outwardly  he  was  a  young  man  of 
thirty-two.  All  his  disciples  at  the  cottage,  except  one,  were  older  than  himself. 
Yet  everyone  looked  upon  him  as  a  father  or  mother.  He  had  attained  an  unbe¬ 
lievable  maturity.  Some  marvelled  at  his  purity,  some  at  his  power,  some  at  his 
intellectuality,  some  at  his  serenity,  which  was  like  the  depths  of  the  ocean, 
unperturbed  by  the  waves  of  applause  or  contumely.  When  had  he  acquired 
all  these  virtues  which  had  made  him,  at  thirty,  a  teacher  of  men?  From  the 
foregoing  pages  the  reader  will  have  formed  an  idea  of  him  as  a  stormy  person, 
struggling,  in  early  youth,  against  poverty  and  spiritual  unbelief.  Afterwards  he 
is  seen  wandering  from  the  Himalayas  to  Cape  Comorin,  raging  against  the 
grievances  and  sufferings  of  the  Indian  masses.  During  his  first  two  years  in 
America  he  had  had  to  fight  tooth  and  nail  against  malicious  critics  in  order  to 
establish  his  reputation  as  a  religious  teacher.  When  had  he,  then,  tapped 
the  secret  spring  of  inner  calmness  and  assurance  without  which  a  teacher  cannot 
transmit  spirituality  to  his  disciples? 

One  must  not  forget  that  Vivekananda,  as  Ramakrishna  had  said,  was  not  an 
ordinary  man,  but  a  nitvasiddha,  perfect  even  before  birth,  an  Isvarakoti,  or 
special  messenger  of  God  born  on  earth  to  fulfil  a  divine  mission.  The  silent 
but  powerful  influence  of  the  guru  always  guided  his  feet.  The  outer  world 
saw  only  the  struggles  and  restlessness  of  his  wandering  days,  but  not  the  inner 
transformation  brought  about  through  the  practice  of  purity,  detachment,  self- 
control,  and  meditation.  The  veil  of  maya,  without  which  no  physical  embodi¬ 
ment  is  possible,  and  which  in  him  was  very  thin,  was  rent  through  the  spiritual 
struggle  of  a  few  years.  People  were  astonished  to  see  his  blossoming  forth  at 
Thousand  Island  Park. 


Vivekananda 


85 


At  Dakshineswar,  though  Sri  Ramakrishna  had  offered  young  Naren  various 
supernatural  powers  of  Yoga  as  a  help  for  his  future  work,  the  disciple  had 
refused  to  accept  them,  as  being  possible  impediments  to  spiritual  progress.  But 
later  these  powers  began  to  manifest  themselves  as  the  natural  fruit  of  his 
spiritual  realizations.  Thus  one  secs  him  at  Thousand  Island  Park  reading  the 
inmost  soul  of  his  followers  before  giving  them  initiation,  and  foretelling  their 
future  careers.  He  prophesied  for  Sister  Christine  extensive  travels  in  Oriental 
countries  and  work  in  India.  He  explained  that  his  method  of  foresight  was 
simple,  at  least  in  the  telling.  He  first  thought  of  space — vast,  blue,  and  extend¬ 
ing  everywhere.  As  he  meditated  on  that  space  intently,  pictures  appeared,  and 
he  then  gave  interpretations  of  them  which  would  indicate  the  future  life  of 
the  person  concerned. 

Even  before  his  arrival  at  Thousand  Island  Park  the  Swami  had  had  other 
manifestations  of  such  Yoga  powers.  For  instance,  while  busy  with  his  lecture 
tour,  sometimes  giving  twelve  or  fourteen  speeches  a  week,  he  would  feel  great 
physical  and  mental  strain  and  often  wonder  what  he  would  speak  of  the  next 
day.  Then  he  would  hear,  at  dead  of  night,  a  voice  shouting  at  him  the  very 
thoughts  he  was  to  present.  Sometimes  it  would  come  from  a  long  distance 
and  then  draw  nearer  and  nearer,  or  again,  it  would  be  like  someone  delivering 
a  lecture  beside  him  as  he  lay  listening  in  bed.  At  other  times  two  voices  would 
argue  before  him,  discussing  at  great  length  ideas,  some  of  which  he  had  never 
before  consciously  heard  or  thought  of,  which  he  would  find  himself  repeating 
the  following  day  from  the  pulpit  or  the  platform. 

Sometimes  people  sleeping  in  the  adjoining  rooms  would  ask  him  in  the  morn¬ 
ing:  “Swami,  with  whom  were  you  talking  last  night?  We  heard  you  talking 
loudly  and  enthusiastically  and  we  were  wondering.”  The  Swami  often  explained 
these  manifestations  as  the  powers  and  potentialities  of  the  soul  generally  called 
inspiration.  He  denied  that  they  were  miracles. 

At  that  time  he  experienced  the  power  of  changing  a  person’s  life  by  a  touch, 
or  clearly  seeing  things  happening  at  a  great  distance.  But  he  seldom  used  these 
and  the  other  powers  he  had  acquired  through  Yoga.  One  day,  much  later, 
Swami  Turiyananda  entered  the  room  while  the  Swami  was  lying  on  his  bed, 
and  beheld,  in  place  of  Vivekananda’s  physical  body,  a  mass  of  radiance.  It  is 
no  wonder  that  today  in  America,  half  a  century  later,  one  meets  men  and 
women  who  saw  or  heard  Swami  Vivekananda  perhaps  once,  and  still  remember 
him  vividly. 

But  it  must  not  be  thought  that  the  Swami  did  not  show  his  lighter  mood 
at  Thousand  Island  Park.  He  unfailingly  discovered  the  little  idiosyncrasies  of 
the  students  and  raised  gales  of  laughter  at  the  dinner-table,  with  some  quip 
or  jest — but  never  in  sarcasm  or  malice.  One  of  the  inmates  of  the  Dutcher 
Cottage  was  Dr.  Wight,  a  very  cultured  man  of  well  over  seventy  who  had  at¬ 
tended  the  Swami’s  classes  and  lectures  in  New  York.  He  became  so  absorbed 
in  the  class  talks  that  at  the  end  of  every  discourse  he  would  invariably  ask  the 
teacher:  “Well,  Swami,  it  all  amounts  to  this  in  the  end,  doesn’t  it? — I  am 
Brahman,  I  am  the  Absolute.’’  The  Swami  would  smile  indulgently  and  answer 
gently,  “Yes,  Dockie,  you  are  Brahman,  you  are  the  Absolute,  in  the  real  essence 


86 


Vivekananda 


of  your  being/'  Later,  when  the  learned  doctor  came  to  the  table  a  trifle  late, 
the  Swami,  with  the  utmost  gravity  but  with  a  merry  twinkle  in  his  eyes,  would 
say,  “Here  comes  Brahman"  or  “Here  is  the  Absolute." 

Sometimes  he  would  say,  “Now  I  am  going  to  cook  for  you,  'brethren/  "  The 
food  he  cooked  would  be  delicious,  but  too  hot  for  Western  tastes.  The  students, 
however,  made  up  their  minds  to  eat  it  even  if  it  strangled  them.  After  the  meal 
was  cooked,  the  Swami  would  stand  in  the  door  with  a  white  napkin  draped  over 
his  arm,  in  the  fashion  of  the  negro  waiters  in  a  dining-car,  and  intone  in  perfect 
imitation  their  call  for  dinner:  “Last  call  fo'  the  dining  cah.  Dinner  served." 
And  the  students  would  rock  with  laughter. 

One  day  he  was  telling  the  disciples  the  story  of  Sita  and  of  the  pure  woman¬ 
hood  of  India.  The  question  flashed  in  the  mind  of  one  of  the  women  as  to  how 
some  of  the  beautiful  society  queens  would  appear  to  him,  especially  those 
versed  in  the  art  of  allurement.  Even  before  the  thought  was  expressed,  the 
Swami  said  gravely,  “If  the  most  beautiful  woman  in  the  world  were  to  look 
at  me  in  an  immodest  or  unwomanly  way,  she  would  immediately  turn  into  a 
hideous  green  frog,  and  one  does  not,  of  course,  admire  frogs." 

At  last  the  day  of  the  Swami’s  departure  from  Thousand  Island  Park  arrived. 
It  was  Wednesday,  August  7,  1895.  In  the  morning  he,  Mrs.  Funke,  and  Sister 
Christine  went  for  a  walk.  They  strolled  about  half  a  mile  up  the  hill,  where 
all  was  forest  and  solitude,  and  sat  under  a  low-branched  tree.  The  Swami  sud¬ 
denly  said  to  them:  “Now  we  shall  meditate.  We  shall  be  like  Buddha  under 
the  Bo-tree."  He  became  still  as  a  bronze  statue.  A  thunderstorm  came  up  and 
it  poured;  but  the  Swami  did  not  notice  anything.  Mrs.  Funke  raised  her 
umbrella  and  protected  him  as  much  as  possible.  When  it  was  time  to  return, 
the  Swami  opened  his  eyes  and  said,  “I  feel  once  more  I  am  in  Calcutta  in 
the  rains."  It  is  reported  that  one  day  at  Thousand  Island  Park  he  experienced 
nirvikalpa  samadhi. 

At  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening  the  Swami  boarded  the  steamer  for  Clayton, 
where  he  was  to  catch  the  train  for  New  York.  While  taking  leave  of  the  Islands 
he  said,  “I  bless  these  Thousand  Islands."  As  the  steamer  moved  away,  he 
boyishly  and  joyously  waved  his  hat  to  the  disciples  still  standing  at  the  pier. 

Some  of  his  devotees  thought  that  the  Swami  had  planned  at  Thousand 
Island  Park  to  start  an  organization.  But  they  were  mistaken.  He  wrote  to  a 
disciple: 

We  have  no  organization,  nor  want  to  build  any.  Each  one  is  quite  independent  to 
teach,  quite  free  to  teach,  whatever  he  or  she  likes.  If  you  have  the  spirit  within,  you 
will  never  fail  to  attract  others.  .  .  .  Individuality  is  my  motto.  I  have  no  ambition 
beyond  training  individuals.  I  know  very  little;  that  little  I  teach  without  reserve;  where 
I  am  ignorant  I  confess  it.  ...  I  am  a  sannyasin.  As  such  I  hold  myself  as  a  servant, 
not  as  a  master,  in  this  world. 

Vivekananda,  the  awakener  of  souls,  was  indeed  too  great  to  be  crammed 
within  the  confines  of  a  narrow  organization.  He  had  had  a  unique  experience 
of  inner  freedom  at  Thousand  Island  Park,  which  he  expressed  eloquently  in  his 
poem  “The  Song  of  the  Sannyasin."  He  wrote  from  there  to  a  friend:  “I  am 
free,  my  bonds  are  cut,  what  do  I  care  whether  this  body  goes  or  does  not  go? 


Vivekananda  87 

I  have  a  truth  to  teach — I,  the  child  of  God.  And  He  that  gave  me  the  truth 
will  send  me  fellow  workers  from  earth’s  bravest  and  best.” 

IN  THE  COMPANY  OF  SOME  NOTABLES 

A  month  after  his  return  from  Thousand  Island  Park,  Swami  Vivekananda 
sailed  for  Europe.  Before  we  take  up  that  important  chapter  of  his  life,  however, 
it  will  be  well  to  describe  some  of  his  interesting  experiences  in  America,  espe¬ 
cially  his  meeting  with  noted  personalities. 

Robert  Ingersoll,  the  famous  orator  and  agnostic,  and  Swami  Vivekananda 
had  several  conversations  on  religion  and  philosophy.  Ingersoll,  with  a  fatherly 
solicitude,  asked  the  young  enthusiast  not  to  be  too  bold  in  the  expression 
of  his  views,  on  account  of  people’s  intolerance  of  all  alien  religious  ideas. 
“Forty  years  ago,”  he  said,  “you  would  have  been  hanged  if  you  had  come 
to  preach  in  this  country,  or  you  would  have  been  burnt  alive.  You  would  have 
been  stoned  out  of  the  villages  if  you  had  come  even  much  later.”  The  Swami 
was  surprised.  But  Ingersoll  did  not  realize  that  the  Indian  monk,  unlike  him, 
respected  all  religions  and  prophets,  and  that  he  wanted  to  broaden  the  views 
of  the  Christians  about  Christ’s  teachings. 

One  day,  in  the  course  of  a  discussion,  Ingersoll  said  to  the  Swami,  “I  believe 
in  making  the  most  of  this  world,  in  squeezing  the  orange  dry,  because  this 
world  is  all  we  are  sure  of.”  He  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  God,  soul,  or 
hereafter,  which  he  considered  as  meaningless  jargon.  “I  know  a  better  way 
to  squeeze  the  orange  of  this  world  than  you  do,”  the  Swami  replied,  “and  I 
get  more  out  of  it.  I  know  I  cannot  die,  so  I  am  not  in  a  hurry.  I  know  that  there 
is  no  fear,  so  I  enjoy  the  squeezing.  I  have  no  duty,  no  bondage  of  wife  and 
children  and  property,  so  I  can  love  all  men  and  women.  Everyone  is  God  to 
me.  Think  of  the  joy  of  loving  man  as  God!  Squeeze  your  orange  my  way,  and 
you  will  get  every  single  drop!”  Ingersoll,  it  is  reported,  asked  the  Swami  not 
to  be  impatient  with  his  views,  adding  that  his  own  unrelenting  fight  against 
traditional  religions  had  shaken  men’s  faith  in  theological  dogmas  and  creeds, 
and  thus  helped  to  pave  the  way  for  the  Swami’s  success  in  America. 

Nikola  Tesla,  the  great  scientist  who  specialized  in  the  field  of  electricity, 
was  much  impressed  to  hear  from  the  Swami  his  explanation  of  the  Samkhya 
cosmogony  and  the  theory  of  cycles  given  by  the  Hindus.  He  was  particularly 
struck  by  the  resemblance  between  the  Samkhya  theory  of  matter  and  energy 
and  that  of  modern  physics.  The  Swami  also  met  in  New  York  Sir  William 
Thomson  (afterwards  Lord  Kelvin)  and  Professor  Helmholtz,  two  leading  rep¬ 
resentatives  of  Western  science.  Sarah  Bernhardt,  the  famous  French  actress, 
had  an  interview  with  the  Swami  and  greatly  admired  his  teachings. 

Madame  Emma  Calve,  the  well-known  prima  donna,  described  the  Swami 
as  one  who  “truly  walked  with  God.”  She  came  to  see  him  in  a  state  of  physical 
and  mental  depression.  The  Swami,  who  did  not  at  that  time  know  even  her 
name,  talked  to  her  about  her  worries  and  various  personal  problems.  It  was 
clear  that  he  was  familiar  with  them,  even  though  she  had  never  revealed 
them  to  him  or  to  anyone  else.  When  Madame  Calve  expressed  surprise,  the 
Swami  assured  her  that  no  one  had  talked  to  him  about  her.  “Do  you  think 
that  is  necessary?”  he  asked.  “I  read  you  as  I  would  an  open  book.”  He  gave 


88 


Vivekananda 


her  this  parting  advice:  “You  must  forget.  Be  gay  and  happy  again.  Do  not 
dwell  in  silence  upon  your  sorrows.  Transmute  your  emotions  into  some  form 
of  external  expression.  Your  spiritual  health  requires  it.  Your  art  demands  it.” 

Madame  Calve  later  said:  “I  left  him,  deeply  impressed  by  his  words  and  his 
personality.  He  seemed  to  have  emptied  my  brain  of  all  its  feverish  complexities 
and  placed  there  instead  his  clean  and  calming  thoughts.  I  became  once  again 
vivacious  and  cheerful,  thanks  to  the  effect  of  his  powerful  will.  He  used  no 
hypnosis,  no  mesmerism — nothing  of  that  sort  at  all.  It  was  the  strength  of 
his  character,  the  purity  and  intensity  of  his  purpose,  that  carried  conviction. 
It  seemed  to  me,  when  I  came  to  know  him  better,  that  he  lulled  one's  chaotic 
thoughts  into  a  state  of  peaceful  acquiescence,  so  that  one  could  give  complete 
and  undivided  attention  to  his  words." 

Like  many  people,  Madame  Calve  could  not  accept  the  Vedantic  doctrine 
of  the  individual  soul’s  total  absorption  in  the  Godhead  at  the  time  of  final 
liberation.  “I  cannot  bear  the  idea,"  she  said.  “I  cling  to  my  individuality — 
unimportant  though  it  may  be.  I  don’t  want  to  be  absorbed  into  an  eternal 
unity."  To  this  the  Swami  answered:  “One  day  a  drop  of  water  fell  into  the 
vast  ocean.  Finding  itself  there,  it  began  to  weep  and  complain,  just  as  you 
are  doing.  The  giant  ocean  laughed  at  the  drop  of  water.  'Why  do  you  weep?’ 
it  asked.  ‘I  do  not  understand.  When  you  join  me,  you  join  all  your  brothers 
and  sisters,  the  other  drops  of  water  of  which  I  am  made.  You  become  the 
ocean  itself.  If  you  wish  to  leave  me  you  have  only  to  rise  up  on  a  sunbeam 
into  the  clouds.  From  there  you  can  descend  again,  little  drop  of  water,  a  bless¬ 
ing  and  a  benediction  to  the  thirsty  earth.’  ’’ 

Did  not  the  Swami  thus  explain  his  own  individuality?  Before  his  present 
embodiment,  he  had  remained  absorbed  in  communion  with  the  Absolute. 
Then  he  accepted  the  form  of  an  individual  to  help  humanity  in  its  spiritual 
struggle.  A  giant  soul  like  his  is  not  content  to  remain  eternally  absorbed  in 
the  Absolute.  Such  also  was  the  thought  of  Buddha. 

In  the  company  of  great  men  and  women,  the  Swami  revealed  his  intellectual 
and  spiritual  power.  But  one  sees  his  human  side  especially  in  his  contact  with 
humble  people.  In  America  he  was  often  taken  to  be  a  negro.  One  day,  as  he 
alighted  from  a  train  in  a  town  where  he  was  to  deliver  a  lecture,  he  was  given 
a  welcome  by  the  reception  committee.  The  most  prominent  townspeople 
were  all  there.  A  negro  porter  came  up  to  him  and  said  that  he  had  heard  how 
one  of  his  own  people  had  become  great  and  asked  the  privilege  of  shaking 
hands  with  him.  Warmly  the  Swami  shook  his  hand,  saying,  “Thank  you!  Thank 
you,  brother!"  He  never  resented  being  mistaken  for  a  negro.  It  happened  many 
times,  especially  in  the  South,  that  he  was  refused  admittance  to  a  hotel,  a 
barber  shop,  or  a  restaurant,  because  of  his  dark  skin.  When  the  Swami  related 
these  incidents  to  a  Western  disciple,  he  was  promptly  asked  why  he  did  not 
tell  people  that  he  was  not  a  negro  but  a  Hindu.  “What!"  the  Swami  replied 
indignantly.  “Rise  at  the  expense  of  another?  I  did  not  come  to  earth  for  that." 

Swami  Vivekananda  was  proud  of  his  race  and  his  dark  complexion.  “He  was 
scornful,"  wrote  Sister  Nivedita,  “in  his  repudiation  of  the  pseudo-ethnology 
of  privileged  races.  'If  I  am  grateful  to  my  white-skinned  Aryan  ancestors,’  he 
said,  'I  am  far  more  so  to  my  yellow-skinned  Mongolian  ancestors,  and  most 


Vivekananda 


89 


of  all  to  the  black-skinned  negroids.'  He  was  immensely  proud  of  his  physi¬ 
ognomy,  especially  of  what  he  called  his  ‘Mongolian  jaw,’  regarding  it  as  a  sign 
of  ‘bulldog  tenacity  of  purpose.’  Referring  to  this  particular  racial  characteristic, 
which  is  believed  to  be  behind  every  Aryan  people,  he  one  day  exclaimed: 
‘Don’t  you  see?  The  Tartar  is  the  wine  of  the  race!  He  gives  energy  and  power 
to  every  blood.’  ” 

The  Swami  had  a  strange  experience  in  a  small  American  town,  where  he 
was  confronted  by  a  number  of  college  boys  who  had  been  living  there  on  a 
ranch  as  cowboys.  They  heard  him  describe  the  power  of  concentration,  through 
which  a  man  could  become  completely  oblivious  of  the  outside  world.  So  they 
decided  to  put  him  to  test  and  invited  him  to  lecture  to  them.  A  wooden 
tub  was  placed,  with  bottom  up,  to  serve  as  a  platform.  The  Swami  commenced 
his  address  and  soon  appeared  to  be  lost  in  his  subject.  Suddenly  shots  were 
fired  in  his  direction,  and  bullets  went  whizzing  past  his  ears.  But  the  Swami 
continued  his  lecture  as  though  nothing  was  happening.  When  he  had  finished, 
the  young  men  flocked  about  him  and  congratulated  him  as  a  good  fellow. 

In  his  lectures  and  conversations  the  Swami  showed  a  wonderful  sense  of 
humour.  It  was  a  saving  feature  in  his  strenuous  life,  and  without  it  he  might 
have  broken  down  under  the  pressure  of  his  intense  thinking.  Once,  in  one  of 
his  classes  in  Minneapolis,  the  Swami  was  asked  by  a  student  if  Hindu  mothers 
threw  their  children  to  the  crocodiles  in  the  river.  Immediately  came  the  reply: 
“Yes,  Madam!  They  threw  me  in,  but  like  your  fabled  Jonah,  I  got  out  again!” 
Another  time,  a  lady  became  rather  romantic  about  the  Swami  and  said  to  him, 
“Swami!  You  are  my  Romeo  and  I  am  your  Desdemona!”  The  Swami  said 
quickly,  “Madam,  you’d  better  brush  up  your  Shakespeare.” 

As  already  stated,  Swami  Vivekananda  was  particularly  friendly  with  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Hale,  of  Chicago,  and  their  young  daughters  and  two  nieces,  named  Mary, 
Isabel,  Harriet,  and  Jean.  He  affectionately  called  Mr.  Hale  “Father  Pope” 
and  Mrs.  Hale  “Mother  Church.”  The  girls  he  addressed  as  “sisters”  or  “babies.” 
A  very  sweet  and  warm  relationship  grew  up  between  them  and  the  Swami. 
His  relationship  with  the  eldest  girl,  Mary,  was  especially  close.  He  wrote  to  her 
many  light-hearted  letters.  In  a  letter  to  the  sisters,  dated  July  26,  1894,  the 
Swami  said: 


Now,  don’t  let  my  letters  stray  beyond  the  circle,  please — I  had  a  beautiful  letter  from 
Sister  Mary — See  how  I  am  getting  the  dash — Sister  Jcany  teaches  me  all  that — She  can 
jump  and  run  and  play  and  swear  like  a  devil  and  talk  slang  at  the  rate  of  five  hundred 
a  minute — only  she  does  not  much  care  for  religion — only  a  little.  .  .  .  Darn  it,  I  forget 
everything — I  had  duckings  in  the  sea  like  a  fish — I  am  enjoying  every  bit  of  it — What 
nonsense  was  the  song  Harriet  taught  me,  “Dans  la  Plaine” — the  deuce  take  it! — I  told 
it  to  a  French  scholar  and  he  laughed  and  laughed  till  the  fellow  was  wellnigh  burst  at 
my  wonderful  translation — That  is  the  way  you  would  have  taught  me  French — You  are 
a  pack  of  fools  and  heathens,  I  tell  you — How  you  are  gasping  for  breath  like  huge  fish 
stranded — I  am  glad  that  you  are  sizzling11 — Oh!  how  nice  and  cool  it  is  here — and  it 
is  increased  a  hundredfold  when  I  think  about  the  gasping,  sizzling,  boiling,  frying  four 
old  maids — and  how  cool  and  nice  I  am  here — Whoooooo!  !  !  .  .  . 

Well — dear  old  maids — you  sometimes  have  a  glimpse  of  the  lake  and  on  very  hot 

11  Referring  to  the  summer  heat  of  Chicago. 


90 


Vivekananda 


noons  think  of  going  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  lake — down — down — down — until  it 
is  cool  and  nice,  and  then  to  lie  down  on  the  bottom,  with  just  that  coolness  above  and 
around — and  lie  there  still — silent — and  just  doze — not  sleep,  but  a  dreamy,  dozing, 
half  unconscious  sort  of  bliss — very  much  like  that  which  opium  brings — That  is  deli¬ 
cious — and  drinking  lots  of  iced  water — Lord  bless  my  soul! — I  had  such  cramps  several 
times  as  would  have  killed  an  elephant — So  I  hope  to  keep  myself  away  from  the  cold 
water — 

May  you  all  be  happy,  dear  fin  de  siecle  young  ladies,  is  the  constant  prayer  of 
Vivekananda. 

One  realizes  how  deeply  Swami  Vivekananda  had  entered  into  the  American 
spirit,  when  one  sees  how  facile  he  was  in  his  use  of  American  slang.  Surely  this 
letter  is  an  example.  As  we  have  stated  before,  the  Swami  also  needed  diversions 
of  this  kind  in  order  to  obtain  relief  from  his  intensely  serious  life  and  thinking 
in  America.  One  recalls  that  Sri  Ramakrishna,  too,  would  often  indulge  in  light 
talk  in  order  to  keep  his  mind  on  the  level  of  ordinary  consciousness. 

Shortly  after  his  success  at  the  Parliament  of  Religions,  the  Swami  began, 
as  we  have  seen,  to  write  to  his  devotees  in  India,  giving  them  his  plans  for 
India’s  regeneration.  He  urged  them  to  take  up  work  that  would  lead  to  better 
systems  of  education  and  hygiene  throughout  India.  He  wanted  a  magazine  to 
be  started  for  disseminating  among  his  fellow  countrymen  the  broad  truths  of 
Vedanta,  which  would  create  confidence  in  their  minds  regarding  their  power 
and  potentialities,  and  give  them  back  their  lost  individuality.  He  exhorted  his 
devotees  to  work  especially  for  the  uplift  of  women  and  the  masses,  without 
whose  help  India  would  never  be  able  to  raise  herself  from  her  present  state 
of  stagnation.  He  sent  them  money,  earned  through  his  lectures,  for  religious, 
educational,  and  other  philanthropic  activities.  His  enthusiastic  letters  inspired 
them.  But  they  wanted  him  to  return  and  take  up  the  leadership.  They  were 
also  distressed  to  see  the  malicious  propaganda  against  him  by  the  Christian 
missionaries  in  India.  The  Swami,  however,  repeatedly  urged  them  to  depend 
upon  themselves.  “Stand  on  your  own  feet!”  he  wrote  to  them.  “If  you  are 
really  my  children,  you  will  fear  nothing,  stop  at  nothing.  You  will  be  like  lions. 
You  must  rouse  India  and  the  whole  world.” 

About  the  criticism  from  the  Christian  missionaries,  he  wrote:  “The  Chris¬ 
tianity  that  is  preached  in  India  is  quite  different  from  what  one  sees  here. 
You  will  be  astonished  to  hear  that  I  have  friends  in  this  country  amongst  the 
clergy  of  the  Episcopal  and  Presbyterian  Churches,  who  are  as  broad-minded, 
as  liberal,  and  as  sincere  as  you  are  in  your  own  religion.  The  real  spiritual  man — 
everywhere — is  broad-minded.  His  love  forces  him  to  be  so.  They  to  whom 
religion  is  a  trade  are  forced  to  become  narrow-minded  and  mischievous  by  their 
very  introduction  into  religion  of  the  competitive,  fighting,  selfish  methods  of 
the  world.”  He  requested  the  Indian  devotees  not  to  pay  any  heed  to  what  the 
missionaries  were  saying  either  for  or  against  him.  “I  shall  work  incessantly,” 
he  wrote,  “until  I  die,  and  even  after  death  I  shall  work  for  the  good  of  the 
world.  Truth  is  infinitely  more  weighty  than  untruth.  ...  It  is  the  force  of  char¬ 
acter,  of  purity,  and  of  truth — of  personality.  So  long  as  I  have  these  things, 


Vivekananda  91 

you  can  feel  easy;  no  one  will  be  able  to  injure  a  hair  of  my  head.  If  they  try, 
they  will  fail,  saith  the  Lord.” 

FIRST  VISIT  TO  EUROPE 

For  some  time  Swami  Vivekananda  had  been  planning  a  visit  to  London. 
He  wished  to  sow  the  seed  of  Vedanta  in  the  capital  of  the  mighty  British 
Empire.  Miss  Henrietta  Muller  had  extended  to  him  a  cordial  invitation  to  come 
to  London,  and  Mr.  E.  T.  Sturdy  had  requested  him  to  stay  at  his  home  there. 
Mr.  Leggett,  too,  had  invited  the  Swami  to  come  to  Paris  as  his  guest. 

Mr.  Francis  H.  Leggett,  whose  hospitality  the  Swami  had  already  enjoyed 
at  Percy,  was  a  wealthy  business  man  of  New  York.  He  and  two  ladies  of  his 
acquaintance,  Mrs.  William  Sturges  and  Miss  Josephine  MacLeod  (who  were 
sisters),  had  attended  the  Swami’s  lectures  in  New  York  during  the  previous 
winter.  They  were  all  impressed  by  the  Swami’s  personality  and  his  message,  and 
Mr.  Leggett  remarked,  one  day,  that  the  teacher  was  a  man  of  “great  common 
sense.”  An  intimate  relationship  gradually  developed  between  the  Swami,  the 
two  sisters,  and  Mr.  Leggett.  Mrs.  Sturges,  who  was  a  widow,  and  Mr.  Leggett 
became  engaged  and  announced  their  engagement  at  the  summer  camp  at  Percy. 
They  decided  to  be  married  in  Paris,  and  Mr.  Leggett  invited  the  Swami  to  be 
a  witness  at  the  ceremony. 

This  invitation,  coming  at  the  same  time  as  Miss  Muller’s  and  Mr.  Sturdy’s, 
seemed  to  the  Swami,  as  he  described  it  in  a  letter,  a  “divine  call.”  The  Swami’s 
New  York  friends  thought  that  a  sea  voyage  would  be  most  beneficial  for  his 
weary  body  and  mind.  At  this  time  the  Swami  began  to  feel  a  premonition 
of  his  approaching  end.  One  day  he  even  said,  “My  day  is  done.”  But  the 
awareness  of  his  unfulfilled  mission  made  him  forget  his  body. 

The  Swami  and  Mr.  Leggett  sailed  from  New  York  about  the  middle  of 
August  1895,  reaching  Paris  by  the  end  of  the  month.  The  French  metropolis 
with  its  museums,  churches,  cathedrals,  palaces,  and  art  galleries  impressed  him 
as  the  centre  of  European  culture,  and  he  was  introduced  to  a  number  of  enlight¬ 
ened  French  people. 

When  Swami  Vivekananda  arrived  in  London  he  was  enthusiastically  greeted 
by  Miss  Muller,  who  had  already  met  him  in  America,  and  Mr.  Sturdy,  who  had 
studied  Sanskrit  and  had  to  a  certain  degree  practised  asceticism  in  the  Hima¬ 
layas.  The  Swami’s  mind,  one  can  imagine,  was  filled  with  tumultuous  thoughts 
as  he  arrived  in  the  great  city.  He  was  eager  to  test  his  ability  as  an  interpreter 
of  the  spiritual  culture  of  India  in  the  very  citadel  of  the  English-speaking 
nations.  He  also  knew  that  he  belonged  to  a  subject  race,  which  had  been  under 
the  imperialistic  domination  of  England  for  the  past  one  hundred  and  fifty 
years.  He  attributed  India’s  suffering,  at  least  in  part,  to  this  alien  rule.  He  was 
not  unaware  of  the  arrogance  of  the  British  ruling  class  in  India,  to  whom 
India  was  a  benighted  country  steeped  in  superstition.  Would  the  Britishers 
give  a  patient  hearing  to  the  religion  and  philosophy  of  his  ancestors,  of  which 
he  was  so  proud?  Would  they  not  rather  think  that  nothing  good  could  ever 
come  “out  of  Nazareth”?  He  did  not,  as  we  learn  from  his  own  confession,  set 
foot  on  English  soil  with  the  friendliest  of  feelings.  But  how  he  felt  when  he 
left  England  after  his  short  visit  will  be  presently  described. 


92 


Vivekananda 


After  a  few  days’  rest  the  Swami  quietly  began  his  work.  Through  friends 
he  was  gradually  introduced  to  people  who  were  likely  to  be  interested  in  his 
thoughts;  he  also  devoted  part  of  his  time  to  visiting  places  of  historical  interest. 
Within  three  weeks  of  his  arrival  he  was  already  engaged  in  strenuous  activity. 
A  class  was  started  and  soon  the  hall  was  found  inadequate  to  accommodate 
the  students.  Newspapers  interviewed  him  and  called  him  the  “Hindu  yogi.” 
Lady  Isabel  Margesson  and  several  other  members  of  the  nobility  became 
attracted  to  the  Swami’s  teachings.  His  first  public  lecture  was  attended  by 
many  educated  and  thoughtful  people;  some  of  the  leading  newspapers  were 
enthusiastic  about  it.  The  Standard  compared  his  moral  stature  with  that  of 
Rammohan  Roy  and  Keshab  Chandra  Sen.  The  London  Daily  Chronicle  wrote 
that  he  reminded  people  of  Buddha.  Even  the  heads  of  churches  showed  their 
warm  appreciation. 

But  the  Swami’s  greatest  acquisition  in  London  was  Miss  Margaret  E.  Noble, 
who  later  became  his  disciple,  consecrating  her  life  to  women’s  education  in 
India.  She  also  espoused  the  cause  of  India’s  political  freedom  and  inspired  many 
of  its  leaders  with  her  written  and  spoken  words. 

Miss  Noble,  the  fourth  child  of  Samuel  Noble,  was  born  in  Northern  Ireland 
in  1867.  Both  her  grandfather  and  her  father  were  Protestant  ministers  in  the 
Wesleyan  church  and  took  active  part  in  the  political  agitation  for  the  freedom 
of  Ireland.  Her  grandmother  and  her  father  gave  her  instruction  in  the  Bible. 

Her  father,  who  died  at  the  age  of  thirty-four,  had  a  premonition  of  his 
daughter’s  future  calling.  One  of  the  last  things  he  whispered  to  his  wife  was 
about  Margaret.  “When  God  calls  her,”  he  said,  “let  her  go.  She  will  spread 
her  wings.  She  will  do  great  things.” 

After  finishing  her  college  education,  Margaret  took  the  position  of  a  teacher 
at  Keswick,  in  the  English  Lake  District,  where  contact  with  the  High  Church 
stirred  her  religious  emotions.  Next  she  taught  in  an  orphanage  in  Rugby,  where 
she  shared  the  manual  labour  of  the  pupils.  At  twenty-one,  Miss  Noble  was 
appointed  as  mistress  at  the  secondary  school  in  Wrexham,  a  large  mining  cen¬ 
tre,  and  participated  in  the  welfare  activities  of  the  town,  visiting  slum  house¬ 
holds  and  looking  for  waifs  and  strays.  Next  she  went  to  Chester  and  taught  a 
class  of  eighteen-year-old  girls.  Here  she  delved  into  the  educational  systems  of 
Pestalozzi  and  Froebel.  And  finally  she  came  to  London,  where,  in  the  autumn 
of  1895,  she  opened  her  own  school,  the  Ruskin  School,  in  Wimbledon. 

The  metropolis  of  the  British  Empire  offered  Miss  Noble  unlimited  oppor¬ 
tunities  for  the  realization  of  her  many  latent  desires — political,  literary,  and 
educational.  Here  she  joined  the  “Free  Ireland”  group,  working  for  Ireland’s 
home  rule.  She  was  also  cordially  received  at  Lady  Ripon’s  exclusive  salon,  where 
art  and  literature  were  regularly  discussed.  This  salon  later  developed  into  the 
Sesame  Club,  with  rooms  in  Dover  Street,  where  Bernard  Shaw,  T.  H.  Huxley, 
and  other  men  of  literature  and  science  discussed  highly  intellectual  subjects. 
Margaret  Noble  became  the  secretary  of  the  club,  and  lectured  on  “The  Psy¬ 
chology  of  the  Child”  and  “The  Rights  of  Women.”  Thus  even  before  she  met 
Swami  Vivekananda  she  was  unconsciously  preparing  the  ground  for  her  future 
activities  in  India. 

At  this  time  Margaret  suffered  a  cruel  blow.  She  was  deeply  in  love  with  a 


Vivekananda 


93 


man  and  had  even  set  the  wedding  date.  But  another  woman  suddenly  snatched 
him  away.  A  few  years  before,  another  young  man,  to  whom  she  was  about  to 
be  engaged,  had  died  of  tuberculosis.  These  experiences  shocked  her  profoundly, 
and  she  began  to  take  a  more  serious  interest  in  religion.  She  was  very  fond 
of  a  simple  prayer  by  Thomas  a  Kempis:  “Be  what  thou  prayest  to  be  made.” 

One  day  her  art  teacher,  Ebenezer  Cook,  said  to  Margaret:  “Lady  Isabel 
Margesson  is  inviting  a  few  friends  to  her  house  to  hear  a  Hindu  Swami  speak. 
Will  you  come?”  Swami  Vivekananda  had  already  been  a  topic  of  discussion 
among  certain  members  of  the  Sesame  Club.  Mr.  E.  T.  Sturdy  and  Miss  Hen¬ 
rietta  Muller  had  told  of  his  extraordinary  success  in  America  as  a  preacher 
and  orator. 

Miss  Noble  first  met  Swami  Vivekananda  on  a  Sunday  evening  in  the  draw¬ 
ing-room  of  Lady  Isabel  Margesson,  situated  in  the  fashionable  West  End  of 
London.  He  was  to  address  a  group  of  people  on  Hindu  thought.  Miss  Noble 
was  one  of  the  last  to  arrive.  Fifteen  people  sat  in  the  room  in  absolute  silence. 
She  nervously  felt  as  if  all  eyes  were  turned  on  her,  and  as  she  took  the  first 
vacant  chair,  she  gathered  her  skirt  to  sit  down  without  making  any  noise.  The 
Swami  sat  facing  her.  A  coal  fire  burnt  on  the  hearth  behind  him.  She  noticed 
that  he  was  tall  and  well  built  and  possessed  an  air  of  deep  serenity.  The  effect 
of  his  long  practice  of  meditation  was  visible  in  the  gentleness  and  loftiness  of 
his  look,  which,  as  she  was  to  write  later,  “Raphael  has  perhaps  painted  for  us 
on  the  brow  of  the  Sistine  Child.” 

The  Swami  looked  at  Lady  Isabel  with  a  sweet  smile,  as  she  said:  “Swamiji, 
all  our  friends  are  here.”  He  chanted  some  Sanskrit  verses.  Miss  Noble  was 
impressed  by  his  melodious  voice.  She  heard  the  Swami  say,  among  other  things: 
“All  our  struggle  is  for  freedom.  We  seek  neither  misery  nor  happiness,  but  free¬ 
dom,  freedom  alone.” 

It  was  at  first  difficult  for  Miss  Noble  to  accept  Swami  Vivekananda’s  views. 
But  before  he  left  London  she  had  begun  to  address  him  as  “Master.” 

Recalling  those  first  meetings  in  London,  and  their  decisive  influence  on  her 
life,  Nivedita  wrote  in  1904  to  a  friend:  “Suppose  he  had  not  come  to  London 
that  time!  Life  would  have  been  like  a  headless  dream,  for  I  always  knew 
that  I  was  waiting  for  something.  I  always  said  that  a  call  would  come.  And 
it  did.  But  if  I  had  known  more  of  life,  I  doubt  whether,  when  the  time 
came,  I  should  certainly  have  recognized  it.  Fortunately,  I  knew  little  and  was 
spared  that  torture.  .  .  .  Always  I  had  this  burning  voice  within,  but  nothing 
to  utter.  How  often  and  often  I  sat  down,  pen  in  hand,  to  speak,  and  there 
was  no  speech!  And  now  there  is  no  end  to  it!  As  surely  I  am  fitted  to  my  world, 
so  surely  is  my  world  in  need  of  me,  waiting — -ready.  The  arrow  has  found  its 
place  in  the  bow.  But  if  he  had  not  come!  If  he  had  meditated,  on  the  Hima¬ 
layan  peaks!  ...  I,  for  one,  had  never  been  here.” 

Swami  Vivekananda  and  Mr.  Sturdy  soon  began  an  English  translation  of  the 
Bhakti  aphorisms  of  Narada.  At  this  time  the  idea  came  to  the  Swami’s  mind 
that  a  religion  could  not  have  a  permanent  hold  upon  people  without  organ¬ 
ization  and  rituals.  A  mere  loose  system  of  philosophy,  he  realized,  soon  lost  its 
appeal.  He  saw  the  need,  therefore,  of  formulating  rituals,  on  the  basis  of  the 


94 


Vivekananda 


Upanishadic  truths,  which  would  serve  a  person  from  birth  to  death — rituals 
that  would  prepare  for  the  ultimate  realization  of  the  supra-mental  Absolute. 

His  stay  in  England  was  very  short,  but  his  insight  enabled  him  to  appraise 
the  English  character  with  considerable  accuracy.  He  wrote  to  a  devotee  on 
November  18,  1895:  “In  England  my  work  is  really  splendid.  I  am  astonished 
myself  at  it.  The  English  do  not  talk  much  in  the  newspapers,  but  they  work 
silently.  I  am  sure  of  having  done  more  work  in  England  than  in  America/' 
And  in  another  letter,  written  on  November  13,  to  a  brother  disciple  in  India: 
"'Every  enterprise  in  this  country  takes  some  time  to  get  started.  But  once  John 
Bull  sets  his  hand  to  a  thing,  he  will  never  let  it  go.  The  Americans  are  quick, 
but  they  are  somewhat  like  straw  on  fire,  ready  to  be  extinguished." 

The  Swami  had  been  receiving  letters  from  American  devotees  asking  him 
to  come  back;  a  rich  lady  from  Boston  promised  to  support  his  work  in  New 
York  throughout  the  winter.  Before  leaving  England,  however,  he  arranged  that 
Mr.  Sturdy  should  conduct  the  classes  in  London  till  the  arrival  of  a  new 
Swami  from  India,  about  the  need  of  whom  he  was  writing  constantly  to  his 
brother  disciples  at  the  Baranagore  monastery. 

ESTABLISHING  THE  WORK  IN  AMERICA 

On  December  6,  1895,  Swami  Vivekananda  returned  to  New  York,  after  his 
two  months’  stay  in  England,  in  excellent  health  and  spirits.  During  his  absence 
abroad,  regular  classes  had  been  carried  on  by  his  American  disciples  Krip- 
ananda,  Abhayananda,  and  Miss  Waldo,  who  taught  raja-yoga  in  both  its  prac¬ 
tical  and  its  theoretical  aspects. 

Together  with  Kripananda  he  took  up  new  quarters,  consisting  of  two  spacious 
rooms,  which  could  accommodate  one  hundred  and  fifty  persons.  The  Swami 
at  once  plunged  into  activity  and  gave  a  series  of  talks  on  work  as  a  spiritual 
discipline.  These  talks  were  subsequently  published  as  Karma-Yoga,  which  is 
considered  one  of  his  best  books.  In  the  meantime  the  devotees  of  the  Swami 
had  been  feeling  the  need  of  a  stenographer  to  take  down  his  talks  in  the  classes 
and  on  public  platforms.  Many  of  his  precious  speeches  had  already  been  lost 
because  there  had  been  no  reporter  to  record  them.  Fortunately  there  appeared 
on  the  scene  an  Englishman,  J.  J.  Goodwin,  who  was  at  first  employed  as  a 
professional  stenographer;  in  a  few  days,  however,  he  was  so  impressed  by  the 
Swami's  life  and  message  that  he  became  his  disciple  and  offered  his  services 
free,  with  the  remark  that  if  the  teacher  could  give  his  whole  life  to  help 
mankind,  he,  the  disciple,  could  at  least  give  his  services  as  an  offering  of  love. 
Goodwin  followed  the  Swami  like  a  shadow  in  America,  Europe,  and  India; 
he  recorded  many  of  the  public  utterances  of  Vivekananda,  now  preserved  in 
published  books,  and  thereby  earned  the  everlasting  gratitude  of  countless  men 
and  women. 

The  Swami  spent  Christmas  of  1895  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Leggett  at  their 
country  home,  Ridgely  Manor,  which  he  frequently  visited  in  order  to  enjoy 
a  respite  from  his  hard  work  in  New  York.  But  even  there  he  would  give  exalted 
spiritual  discourses,  as  will  be  evident  from  the  following  excerpt  from  a 
letter  written  by  Mr.  Leggett  on  January  10,  1896,  to  Miss  MacLeod: 


Vivekananda 


95 


One  night  at  Ridgely  we  were  all  spellbound  by  his  eloquence.  Such  thought  I  have 
never  heard  expressed  by  mortal  man — such  as  he  uttered  for  two  and  a  half  hours.  We 
were  all  deeply  affected.  And  I  would  give  a  hundred  dollars  for  a  typewritten  verbatim 
report  of  it.  Swami  was  inspired  to  a  degree  that  I  have  never  seen  before  or  since.  He 
leaves  us  soon  and  perhaps  we  shall  never  see  him  again,  but  he  will  leave  an  ineffaceable 
impress  on  our  hearts  that  will  comfort  us  to  the  end  of  our  earthly  careers. 

After  a  short  visit  to  Boston  as  the  guest  of  Mrs.  Ole  Bull,  the  Swami  com¬ 
menced  a  series  of  public  lectures  in  New  York  at  Hardeman  Hall,  the  People’s 
Church,  and  later  at  Madison  Square  Garden,  which  had  a  seating  capacity 
of  fifteen  hundred  people.  In  the  last  mentioned  place  he  gave  his  famous  lec¬ 
tures  on  love  as  a  spiritual  discipline,  which  were  subsequently  published  as 
Bhakti-Yoga.  Both  the  lectures  of  the  Swami  and  his  personality  received  favour¬ 
able  comment  from  the  newspapers.  He  initiated  into  monastic  life  Dr.  Street, 
who  assumed  the  name  of  Yogananda. 

Mrs.  Ella  Wheeler  Wilcox,  one  of  the  founders  of  the  New  Thought  move¬ 
ment  in  America,  spoke  highly  of  the  Swami’s  teachings.  She  and  her  husband 
first  went  to  hear  him  out  of  curiosity,  and  what  happened  afterwards  may  be 
told  in  her  own  words: 

Before  we  had  been  ten  minutes  in  the  audience,  we  felt  ourselves  lifted  up  into  an 
atmosphere  so  rarefied,  so  vital,  so  wonderful,  that  we  sat  spellbound  and  almost  breath¬ 
less  to  the  end  of  the  lecture.  When  it  was  over  we  went  out  with  new  courage,  new 
hope,  new  strength,  new  faith,  to  meet  life’s  daily  vicissitudes.  ...  It  was  that  terrible 
winter  of  financial  disasters,  when  banks  failed  and  stocks  went  down  like  broken  bal¬ 
loons,  and  business  men  walked  through  the  dark  valleys  of  despair,  and  the  whole  world 
seemed  topsy-turvy.  Sometimes  after  sleepless  nights  of  worry  and  anxiety,  my  husband 
would  go  with  me  to  hear  the  Swami  lecture,  and  then  he  would  come  out  into  the 
winter  gloom  and  walk  down  the  street  smiling  and  say:  “It  is  all  right.  There  is  nothing 
to  worry  over.”  And  I  would  go  back  to  my  own  duties  and  pleasures  with  the  same 
uplifted  sense  of  soul  and  enlarged  vision.  ...  “I  do  not  come  to  convert  you  to  a  new 
belief,”  he  said.  “I  want  you  to  keep  your  own  belief;  I  want  to  make  the  Methodist  a 
better  Methodist,  the  Presbyterian  a  better  Presbyterian,  the  Unitarian  a  better  Unitarian. 
I  want  to  teach  you  to  live  the  truth,  to  reveal  the  light  within  your  own  soul.”  He  gave 
the  message  that  strengthened  the  man  of  business,  that  caused  the  frivolous  society 
woman  to  pause  and  think;  that  gave  the  artist  new  aspirations;  that  imbued  the  wife 
and  mother,  the  husband  and  father,  with  a  larger  and  a  holier  comprehension  of  duty. 

Having  finished  his  work  in  New  York,  the  Swami,  accompanied  by  Goodwin, 
left  for  Detroit.  The  main  theme  of  his  lectures  and  class  talks  there  was  bhakti, 
or  love  of  God.  At  that  time  he  was  all  love.  A  kind  of  divine  madness  seemed 
to  have  taken  possession  of  him,  as  if  his  heart  would  burst  with  longing  for 
the  beloved  Mother.  He  gave  his  last  public  lecture  at  Temple  Beth-El,  of 
which  Rabbi  Louis  Grossman,  an  ardent  admirer  of  the  Swami,  was  the  leader. 
The  Swami  cast  a  spell,  as  it  were,  over  the  whole  audience.  “Never,”  wrote 
Mrs.  Funke,  “had  I  seen  the  Master  look  as  he  looked  that  night.  There  was 
something  in  his  beauty  not  of  earth.  It  was  as  if  the  spirit  had  almost  burst 
the  bonds  of  flesh,  and  it  was  then  that  I  saw  a  foreshadowing  of  the  end. 
He  was  much  exhausted  from  the  years  of  overwork,  and  it  was  even  then  to  be 


96 


Vivekananda 


seen  that  he  was  not  long  for  this  world.  I  tried  to  close  my  eyes  to  it,  but 
in  my  heart  I  knew  the  truth.  He  had  needed  rest  but  felt  that  he  must  go  on/' 

The  idea  that  his  years  were  numbered  came  to  Swami  Vivekananda  again 
and  again.  He  would  often  say  at  this  time,  “Oh,  the  body  is  a  terrible  bond¬ 
age!”  or  “How  I  wish  that  I  could  hide  myself  for  ever!”  The  note-book  that 
he  had  carried  during  his  wanderings  in  India  contained  these  significant  words: 
“Now  to  seek  a  corner  and  lay  myself  down  to  die!”  In  a  letter  to  a  friend,  he 
quoted  these  words  and  said:  “Yet  all  this  karma  remained.  I  hope  I  have  now 
worked  it  out.  It  appears  like  a  hallucination  that  I  was  in  these  childish  dreams 
of  doing  this  and  doing  that.  I  am  getting  out  of  them.  .  .  .  Perhaps  these  mad 
desires  were  necessary  to  bring  me  over  to  this  country.  And  I  thank  the  Lord 
for  the  experience.” 

On  March  25,  1896,  he  delivered  his  famous  lecture  on  “The  Philosophy 
of  Vedanta”  before  the  graduate  students  of  the  philosophy  department  of 
Harvard  University.  It  produced  such  an  impression  that  he  was  offered  the 
Chair  of  Eastern  Philosophy  in  the  university.  Later  a  similar  offer  came  from 
Columbia  University.  But  he  declined  both  on  the  ground  that  he  was  a 
sannyasin. 

In  February  1896,  Swami  Vivekananda  established  the  Vedanta  Society  of 
New  York  as  a  non-sectarian  organization  with  the  aim  of  preaching  the  uni¬ 
versal  principles  of  Vedanta.  Tolerance  and  religious  universalism  formed  its 
motto,  and  its  members  generally  came  to  be  known  as  “Vedantins.” 

In  the  meantime  the  Swami’s  great  works  Raja-Yoga,  Bhakti-Yoga,  and  Karma- 
Yoga  were  receiving  marked  attention  from  many  thoughtful  people  of  the 
country.  The  Swami  was  serious  about  organizing  Hinduism  on  a  sound,  uni¬ 
versal,  ethical,  and  rational  basis  so  that  it  would  appeal  to  earnest  thinkers  in  all 
parts  of  the  world.  He  wanted  to  reinterpret,  in  keeping  with  the  methods  of 
modern  science,  the  Hindu  view  of  the  soul,  the  Godhead,  the  relationship 
between  matter  and  energy,  and  cosmology.  Further,  he  wanted  to  classify  the 
apparently  contradictory  passages  of  the  Upanishads  bearing  on  the  doctrines 
of  dualism,  qualified  non-dualism,  and  absolute  non-dualism,  and  show  their 
ultimate  reconciliation.  In  order  to  achieve  this  end,  he  asked  his  devotees 
in  India  to  send  him  the  Upanishads  and  the  Vedanta  Sutras  with  their  com¬ 
mentaries  by  the  leading  acharyas,  and  also  the  Brahmana  portions  of  the  Vedas, 
and  the  Puranas.  He  himself  wanted  to  write  this  Maximum  Testament um, 
this  Universal  Gospel,  in  order  to  translate  Hindu  thought  into  Western  lan¬ 
guage.  He  expressed  his  objective  in  a  letter  written  to  one  of  his  disciples 
on  February  17,  1896: 

To  put  the  Hindu  ideas  into  English  and  then  make  out  of  dry  philosophy  and  intri¬ 
cate  mythology  and  queer,  startling  psychology,  a  religion  which  shall  be  easy,  simple, 
popular,  and  at  the  same  time  meet  the  requirements  of  the  highest  minds,  is  a  task 
which  only  those  can  understand  who  have  attempted  it.  The  abstract  Advaita  must 
become  living — poetic — in  everyday  life;  and  out  of  bewildering  yogism  must  come  the 
most  scientific  and  practical  psychology — and  all  this  must  be  put  into  such  a  form  that 
a  child  may  grasp  it.  That  is  my  life’s  work.  The  Lord  only  knows  how  far  I  shall  succeed. 
To  work  we  have  the  right,  not  to  the  fruits  thereof. 


Vivekananda 


97 


The  Swami  always  wanted  a  healthy  interchange  of  ideas  between  East  and 
West;  this  was  one  of  the  aims  of  the  Vedanta  Society  of  New  York.  He  felt 
the  need  of  centres  of  vital  and  continual  communication  between  the  two 
worlds  to  make  “open  doors,  as  it  were,  through  which  the  East  and  the  West 
could  pass  freely  back  and  forth,  without  a  feeling  of  strangeness,  as  from  one 
home  to  another."  Already  he  had  thought  of  bringing  to  America  some  of  his 
brother  disciples  as  preachers  of  Vedanta.  He  also  wanted  to  send  some  of  his 
American  and  English  disciples  to  India  to  teach  science,  industry,  technology, 
economics,  applied  sociology,  and  other  practical  things  which  the  Indians 
needed  in  order  to  improve  their  social  conditions  and  raise  their  standard  of 
living.  He  often  told  his  American  disciples  of  his  vision  that  the  time  would 
come  when  the  lines  of  demarcation  between  East  and  West  would  be  oblit¬ 
erated.  From  England  he  had  already  written  to  Swami  Saradananda  to  prepare 
to  come  to  the  West. 

In  the  spring  of  1896  letters  began  to  pour  in  from  England  beseeching 
Swami  Vivekananda  to  return  there  and  continue  his  activities.  The  Swami 
felt  the  need  of  concentrating  on  the  work  in  both  London  and  New  York,  the 
two  great  metropolises  of  the  Western  world.  Therefore  he  made  arrangements 
with  Miss  Waldo  and  other  qualified  disciples  to  continue  his  program  in 
America  during  his  absence.  Mr.  Francis  Leggett  was  made  the  president  of 
the  Vedanta  Society. 

The  Swami  had  also  been  receiving  letters  from  his  friends  in  India  begging 
for  his  return.  He  said  he  would  come  as  soon  as  possible,  but  he  encouraged 
them  to  organize  the  work,  warning  them  against  the  formation  of  any  new 
cult  around  the  person  of  Sri  Ramakrishna,  who,  to  the  Swami,  was  the  demon¬ 
stration  of  the  eternal  principles  of  Hinduism.  On  April  14,  1896,  he  wrote 
to  India:  “That  Ramakrishna  Paramahamsa  was  God — and  all  that  sort  of 

thing — has  no  go  in  countries  like  this.  M - has  a  tendency  to  put  that 

stuff  down  everybody’s  throat;  but  that  will  make  our  movement  a  little  sect. 
You  keep  separate  from  such  attempts;  at  the  same  time,  if  people  worship  him 
as  God,  no  harm.  Neither  encourage  nor  discourage.  The  masses  will  always 
have  the  person;  the  higher  ones,  the  principle.  We  want  both.  But  principles 
are  universal,  not  persons.  Therefore  stick  to  the  principles  he  taught,  and  let 
people  think  whatever  they  like  of  his  person." 

The  Swami  now  made  definite  arrangements  to  leave  for  London  on  April  1 5, 
and,  after  carrying  out  his  plans  there,  to  sail  for  his  motherland. 

It  should  be  apparent  to  readers  of  Swami  Vivekananda’s  life  that  he  worked 
under  great  pressure,  from  a  fraction  of  which  a  lesser  person  would  have  col¬ 
lapsed  in  no  time.  Naturally  he  spent  his  few  spare  moments  in  fun  and  joking. 
He  would  read  a  copy  of  Punch  or  some  other  comic  paper,  and  laugh  till  tears 
rolled  down  his  cheeks.  He  loved  to  tell  the  story  of  a  Christian  missionary 
who  was  sent  to  preach  to  the  cannibals.  The  new  arrival  proceeded  to  the  chief 
of  the  tribe  and  asked  him,  “Well,  how  did  you  like  my  predecessor?"  The 
cannibal  replied,  smacking  his  lips,  “Simply  de-li-cious!" 

Another  was  the  story  of  a  “darky"  clergyman  who,  while  explaining  the 
creation,  shouted  to  his  congregation:  “You  see,  God  was  a-makin’  Adam,  and 
He  was  a-makin’  him  out  o’  mud.  And  when  He  got  him  made,  He  stuck  him 


98 


Vivekananda 


up  agin  a  fence  to  dry.  And  den — ’’  “Hold  on,  dar,  preacher!"  suddenly  cried 
out  a  learned  listener.  “What’s  dat  about  dis  ’ere  fence?  Who’s  made  dis 
fence?’’  The  preacher  replied  sharply:  “Now  you  listen  ’ere,  Sam  Jones.  Don’t 
you  be  askin’  sich  questions.  You’ll  be  a-smashin’  up  all  theology!’’ 

By  way  of  relaxation  he  would  often  cook  an  Indian  meal  at  a  friend’s  house. 
On  such  occasions  he  brought  out  from  his  pockets  tiny  packets  of  finely 
ground  spices.  He  would  make  hot  dishes  which  his  Western  disciples  could 
hardly  eat  without  burning  their  tongues.  They  were,  no  doubt,  soothing  to  his 
high-strung  temperament. 

But  the  Swami’s  brain  was  seething  with  new  ideas  all  the  time.  He  very 
much  wanted  to  build  a  “Temple  Universal’’  where  people  of  all  faiths  would 
gather  to  worship  the  Godhead  through  the  symbol  Om,  representing  the  un¬ 
differentiated  Absolute.  At  another  time,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1895,  he 
wrote  to  Mrs.  Bull  about  buying  one  hundred  and  eight  acres  of  land  in  the 
Catskill  Mountains  where  his  students  would  build  camps  and  practice  medi¬ 
tation  and  other  disciplines  during  the  summer  holidays. 

A  touching  incident,  which  occurred  in  1894,  may  be  told  here;  it  shows  the 
high  respect  in  which  some  of  the  ladies  of  Cambridge,  Massachusetts,  held  the 
Swami  and  his  mother.  The  Swami  one  day  spoke  to  them  about  “The  Ideals 
of  Indian  Women,’’  particularly  stressing  the  ideal  of  Indian  motherhood.  They 
were  greatly  moved.  The  following  Christmas  they  sent  the  Swami’s  mother  in 
India  a  letter  together  with  a  beautiful  picture  of  the  Child  Jesus  on  the  lap  of 
the  Virgin  Mary.  They  wrote  in  the  letter:  “At  this  Christmastide,  when  the 
gift  of  Mary’s  son  to  the  world  is  celebrated  and  rejoiced  over  with  us,  it  would 
seem  the  time  of  remembrance.  We,  who  have  your  son  in  our  midst,  send  you 
greetings.  His  generous  service  to  men,  women,  and  children  in  our  midst  was 
laid  at  your  feet  by  him,  in  an  address  he  gave  us  the  other  day  on  the  Ideals 
of  Motherhood  in  India.  The  worship  of  his  mother  will  be  to  all  who  heard 
him  an  inspiration  and  an  uplift.’’ 

The  Swami  often  spoke  to  his  disciples  about  his  mother’s  wonderful  self- 
control,  and  how  on  one  occasion  she  had  gone  without  food  for  fourteen  days. 
He  acknowledged  that  her  character  was  a  constant  inspiration  to  his  life  and 
work. 

The  love  and  adoration  in  which  the  Swami  was  held  by  his  Western  disciples 
can  hardly  be  over-emphasized.  Some  described  him  as  the  “lordly  monk,’’  and 
some  as  a  “grand  seigneur.’’  Mrs.  Leggett  said  that  in  all  her  experience  she  had 
met  only  two  celebrated  personages  who  could  make  one  feel  perfectly  at  ease 
without  for  an  instant  losing  their  own  dignity,  and  one  of  them  was  Swami 
Vivekananda.  Sister  Nivedita  described  him  aptly  as  a  Plato  in  thought  and  a 
modern  Savonarola  in  his  fearless  outspokenness.  William  James  of  Harvard 
addressed  him  as  “Master"  and  referred  to  him  in  Varieties  of  Religious  Experi¬ 
ence  as  the  “paragon  of  Vedantists." 

MEETING  WITH  MAX  MULLER 

A  pleasant  surprise  awaited  Swami  Vivekananda  on  his  arrival  in  London. 
Swami  Saradananda  had  already  come  and  was  staying  as  the  guest  of  Mr. 
Sturdy.  The  two  Swamis  had  not  seen  each  other  in  a  very  long  time.  Swami 


Vivekananda  99 

Vivekananda  was  told  all  the  news  of  his  spiritual  brothers  at  the  Alambazar 
monastery  and  their  activities  in  India.  It  was  a  most  happy  occasion. 

Swami  Vivekananda  soon  plunged  into  a  whirlwind  of  activity.  From  the 
beginning  of  May  he  conducted  five  classes  a  week  and  a  Friday  session  for 
open  discussion.  He  gave  a  series  of  three  Sunday  lectures  in  one  of  the  galleries 
of  the  Royal  Institute  of  Painters  in  Water-Colours,  in  Piccadilly,  and  also 
lectured  at  Princes’  Hall  and  the  Lodge  of  Annie  Besant,  in  addition  to  speaking 
at  many  clubs,  and  in  educational  institutions  and  drawing-rooms.  His  audiences 
consisted  mostly  of  intellectual  and  serious-minded  people.  His  speeches  on 
jnana-yoga,  containing  the  essence  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy,  were  mostly 
given  in  England.  Canon  Wilberforce  held  a  reception  in  the  Swami’s  honour, 
to  which  he  invited  many  distinguished  people. 

At  one  of  the  meetings,  at  the  close  of  his  address,  a  white-haired  and  well- 
known  philosopher  said  to  the  Swami:  “You  have  spoken  splendidly,  sir,  but 
you  have  told  us  nothing  new.”  Quick  came  the  Swami’s  reply:  “Sir,  I  have 
told  you  the  Truth.  That,  the  Truth,  is  as  old  as  the  immemorial  hills,  as  old 
as  humanity,  as  old  as  creation,  as  old  as  the  Great  God.  If  I  have  told  you 
in  such  words  as  will  make  you  think,  make  you  live  up  to  your  thinking,  do  I 
not  do  well  in  telling  it?”  Loud  applause  greeted  him  at  the  end  of  these 
remarks. 

The  Swami  was  quick  in  repartee.  During  the  question  period  a  man,  who 
happened  to  be  a  native  of  Scotland,  asked,  “What  is  the  difference  between 
a  baboo  and  a  baboon?”12  “Oh,  not  much,”  was  the  instantaneous  reply  of  the 
Swami.  “It  is  like  the  difference  between  a  sot  and  a  Scot — just  the  difference 
of  a  letter.” 

In  one  of  his  public  lectures  in  England  he  paid  the  most  touching  tribute  to 
his  Master,  Sri  Ramakrishna.  He  said  that  he  had  not  one  little  word  of  his 
own  to  utter,  not  one  infinitesimal  thought  of  his  own  to  unfold;  everything, 
every  single  thing,  all  that  he  was  himself,  all  that  he  could  be  to  others,  all 
that  he  might  do  for  the  world,  came  from  that  single  source,  from  that  pure 
soul,  from  that  illimitable  inspiration,  from  him  who,  seated  “there  in  my 
beloved  India,  had  solved  the  tremendous  secret,  and  bestowed  the  solution  on 
all,  ungrudgingly  and  with  divine  prodigality.”  The  Swami’s  own  self  was 
utterly  forgotten,  altogether  ignored.  “I  am  what  I  am,  and  what  I  am  is  always 
due  to  him;  whatever  in  me  or  in  my  words  is  good  and  true  and  eternal  came 
to  me  from  his  mouth,  his  heart,  his  soul.  Sri  Ramakrishna  is  the  spring  of 
this  phase  of  the  earth’s  religious  life,  of  its  impulses  and  activities.  If  I  can 
show  the  world  one  glimpse  of  my  Master,  I  shall  not  have  lived  in  vain.” 

It  was  Ramakrishna  who  brought  him  in  contact  with  Max  Muller,  the  great 
German  Sanskritist  and  Indologist,  who  had  been  impressed  by  the  eloquence 
of  Keshab  Chandra  Sen  and  his  religious  fervour,  and  had  also  come  to  know 
of  the  influence  that  Sri  Ramakrishna  had  exerted  in  the  development  of 
Keshab's  life.  From  the  information  that  he  had  been  able  to  gather  from 
India,  Max  Muller  had  already  published  an  article  on  Ramakrishna  in  the 

12  In  Northern  India  the  word  baboo  is  used  at  the  end  of  a  man's  first  name  as  a  sign 
of  respect,  somewhat  as  the  English  word  Mr.  before  the  name  of  a  gentleman.  The 
questioner  was  evidently  making  fun  of  the  Swami. 


100 


Vivekananda 


Nineteenth  Century ,  entitled  “A  Real  Mahatman.”  Now  he  was  eager  to  meet 
a  direct  disciple  of  the  Master,  and  invited  Swami  Vivekananda  to  lunch  with 
him  in  Oxford  on  May  28,  1896. 

The  Swami  was  delighted  to  meet  the  savant.  When  the  name  of  Rama- 
krishna  was  mentioned,  the  Swami  said,  “He  is  worshipped  by  thousands  today, 
Professor.” 

“To  whom  else  shall  worship  be  accorded,  if  not  to  such?”  was  Max  Muller’s 
reply. 

Regarding  Max  Muller  and  his  wife,  the  Swami  later  wrote: 

The  visit  was  really  a  revelation  to  me.  That  little  white  house,  its  setting  in  a  beauti¬ 
ful  garden,  the  silver-haired  sage,  with  a  face  calm  and  benign,  and  forehead  smooth  as 
a  child’s  in  spite  of  seventy  winters,  and  every  line  in  that  face  speaking  of  a  deep-seated 
mine  of  spirituality  somewhere  behind;  that  noble  wife,  the  helpmate  of  his  life  through 
his  long  and  arduous  task  of  exciting  interest,  overriding  opposition  and  contempt,  and 
at  last  creating  a  respect  for  the  thoughts  of  the  sages  of  ancient  India — the  trees,  the 
flowers,  the  calmness,  and  the  clear  sky — all  these  sent  me  back  in  imagination  to  the 
glorious  days  of  ancient  India,  the  days  of  our  brahmarshis13  and  rajarshis,14  the  days  of 
the  great  vanaprasthins,15  the  days  of  Arundhatis  and  Vasishthas.16  It  was  neither  the 
philologist  nor  the  scholar  that  I  saw,  but  a  soul  that  is  every  day  realizing  its  oneness 
with  the  universe. 

The  Swami  was  deeply  affected  to  see  Max  Muller’s  love  for  India.  “I  wish,” 
he  wrote  enthusiastically,  “I  had  a  hundredth  part  of  that  love  for  my  mother¬ 
land.  Endowed  with  an  extraordinary,  and  at  the  same  time  an  intensely  active, 
mind,  he  has  lived  and  moved  in  the  world  of  Indian  thought  for  fifty  years  or 
more,  and  watched  the  sharp  interchange  of  light  and  shade  in  the  interminable 
forest  of  Sanskrit  literature  with  deep  interest  and  heartfelt  love,  till  they  have 
sunk  into  his  very  soul  and  coloured  his  whole  being.” 

The  Swami  asked  Max  Muller:  “When  are  you  coming  to  India?  All  men 
there  would  welcome  one  who  has  done  so  much  to  place  the  thoughts  of  their 
ancestors  in  a  true  light.” 

The  face  of  the  aged  sage  brightened  up;  there  was  almost  a  tear  in  his  eye, 
a  gentle  nodding  of  the  head,  and  slowly  the  words  came  out:  “I  would  not 
return  then;  you  would  have  to  cremate  me  there.” 

Further  questions  on  the  Swami’s  part  seemed  an  unwarranted  intrusion  into 
realms  wherein  were  stored  the  holy  secrets  of  a  man’s  heart. 

Max  Muller  asked  the  Swami,  “What  are  you  doing  to  make  Sri  Rama- 
krishna  known  to  the  world?”  He  himself  was  eager  to  write  a  fuller  biography 
of  the  Master  if  he  could  only  procure  the  necessary  materials.  At  the  Swami’s 
request,  Swami  Saradananda  wrote  down  the  sayings  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  and 
the  facts  of  his  life.  Later  Max  Muller  embodied  these  in  his  book  The  Life  and 
Sayings  of  £ri  Ramakrishna. 

One  day  Saradananda  asked  the  Swami  why  he  himself  had  not  written  about 
the  Master’s  life  for  Max  Muller.  He  answered:  “I  have  such  deep  feeling  for 

18  Sages  illumined  by  the  Knowledge  of  Brahman. 

14  Kings  illumined  by  the  Knowledge  of  Brahman. 

15  A  vanaprasthm  is  a  man  who,  during  the  third  stage  of  life,  lives  with  his  wife  in 
solitude,  both  devoting  themselves  to  the  contemplation  of  the  Godhead. 

16  Arundhati  was  the  wife  of  the  great  Hindu  sage  Vasishtha. 


Vivekananda 


101 


the  Master  that  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  write  about  him  for  the  public.  If  I 
had  written  the  article  Max  Muller  wanted,  then  I  would  have  proved,  quoting 
from  philosophies,  the  scriptures,  and  even  the  holy  books  of  the  Christians, 
that  Ramakrishna  was  the  greatest  of  all  prophets  born  in  this  world.  That 
would  have  been  too  much  for  the  old  man.  You  have  not  thought  so  deeply 
about  the  Master  as  I  have;  hence  you  could  write  in  a  way  that  would  satisfy 
Max  Muller.  Therefore  I  asked  you  to  write/' 

Max  Muller  showed  the  Swami  several  colleges  in  Oxford  and  the  Bodleian 
Library,  and  at  last  accompanied  him  to  the  railroad  station.  To  the  Swami's 
protest  that  the  professor  should  not  take  such  trouble,  the  latter  said,  “It  is 
not  every  day  that  one  meets  with  a  disciple  of  Ramakrishna  Paramahamsa.” 

Besides  doing  intensive  public  work  in  England,  the  Swami  made  there  some 
important  personal  contacts.  The  names  of  Goodwin,  Henrietta  Muller,  Mar¬ 
garet  Noble,  and  Sturdy  have  already  been  mentioned.  These  knew  him  inti¬ 
mately  during  his  second  visit  and  had  become  his  disciples.  Now  came  the  turn 
of  Captain  and  Mrs.  Sevier.  The  captain  was  a  retired  officer  of  the  English 
army,  forty-nine  years  old,  and  had  served  for  many  years  in  India.  Both  were 
earnest  students  of  religion  and  had  sought  the  highest  truth  in  various  sects 
and  creeds,  but  had  not  found  it  anywhere.  When  they  heard  Swami  Vive¬ 
kananda,  they  intuitively  realized  that  his  teachings  were  what  they  had  so  long 
sought.  They  were  deeply  impressed  by  the  non-dualistic  philosophy  of  India 
and  the  Swami's  personality. 

Coming  out  of  one  of  the  Swami's  lectures,  Captain  Sevier  asked  Miss 
MacLeod,  who  had  already  known  the  Swami  in  America:  “You  know  this 
young  man?  Is  he  what  he  seems?” 

“Yes.” 

“In  that  case  one  must  follow  him  and  with  him  find  God.” 

The  Captain  went  to  his  wife  and  said,  “Will  you  let  me  become  the  Swami's 
disciple?” 

“Yes,”  she  replied. 

She  asked  him,  “Will  you  let  me  become  the  Swami's  disciple?” 

He  replied  with  affectionate  humour,  “I  am  not  so  sure!” 

The  very  first  time  the  Swami  met  Mrs.  Sevier  in  private  he  addressed  her 
as  “Mother”  and  asked  her  if  she  would  not  like  to  come  to  India,  adding,  “I 
will  give  you  my  best  realizations.” 

A  very  affectionate  relationship  sprang  up  between  the  Swami  and  the 
Seviers,  and  the  latter  regarded  him  as  their  son.  They  became  his  intimate 
companions  and  offered  him  all  their  savings.  But  the  Swami,  anxious  about 
their  future  worldly  security,  persuaded  them  to  keep  the  greater  portion  of 
their  fortune.  Captain  and  Mrs.  Sevier,  together  with  Miss  Noble  and  Goodwin, 
were  the  choicest  among  the  followers  that  Swami  Vivekananda  gathered  in 
England,  and  all  of  them  remained  faithful  to  him  and  his  work  till  the  last 
days  of  their  lives. 

Through  the  generosity  of  the  Seviers,  the  Swami,  as  will  be  seen,  established 
the  Advaita  Asrama  at  Mayavati  in  the  Himalayas  for  the  training  of  his 
disciples,  both  Eastern  and  Western,  in  the  contemplation  of  the  Impersonal 
Godhead.  After  Captain  Sevier's  death  in  the  monastery,  Mrs.  Sevier  lived  there 


102 


Vivekananda 


for  fifteen  years — the  only  Western  woman  in  that  remote  region  of  the  moun¬ 
tains,  which  is  inaccessible  for  long  months  of  the  year — busying  herself  with 
the  education  of  the  children  of  the  neighbouring  hills.  Once  Miss  MacLeod 
asked  her,  “Do  you  not  get  bored?’'  “I  think  of  him,”  she  replied,  referring 
to  Swami  Vivekananda. 

Though  preoccupied  with  various  activities  in  England,  the  Swami  never  for 
one  moment  forgot  his  work  in  India.  After  all,  it  had  been  his  intense  desire  to 
find  means  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  his  countrymen  that  had  brought  him 
to  the  West.  That  hope  he  always  cherished  in  a  corner  of  his  mind,  both  in 
Europe  and  in  America.  He  had  to  train  his  brother  disciples  as  future  workers 
in  India.  And  so  he  is  seen  writing  to  them  in  detail  regarding  the  organization 
of  the  monastery  at  Alambazar,  where  they  had  been  living  for  some  time. 

On  April  27,  1896,  he  sent  instructions  about  the  daily  life  of  the  monks,  their 
food  and  clothing,  their  intercourse  with  the  public,  and  about  the  provision  of  a 
spacious  library  at  the  monastery,  a  smaller  room  for  interviews,  a  big  hall  for 
religious  discussions  with  the  devotees,  a  small  room  for  an  office,  another  for 
smoking,  and  so  forth  and  so  on.  He  advised  them  to  furnish  the  rooms  in  the 
simplest  manner  and  to  keep  an  eye  on  the  water  for  drinking  and  cooking.  The 
monastery,  he  suggested,  should  be  under  the  management  of  a  President  and 
a  Secretary  to  be  elected  by  vote.  Study,  preaching,  and  religious  practices 
should  be  important  items  among  the  duties  of  the  inmates.  He  also  desired 
to  establish  a  math  for  women,  directly  under  the  control  of  the  Holy  Mother. 
The  monks  were  not  to  visit  the  women’s  quarters.  In  conclusion,  he  recom¬ 
mended  Swami  Brahmananda  as  the  President  of  the  math,  and  said:  “He  who 
is  the  servant  of  all  is  their  true  master.  He  never  becomes  a  leader  in  whose 
love  there  is  a  consideration  of  high  or  low.  He  whose  love  knows  no  end  and 
never  stops  to  consider  high  or  low  has  the  whole  world  lying  at  his  feet.”  For 
his  workers  the  Swami  wanted  men  with  “muscles  of  iron  and  nerves  of  steel, 
inside  which  dwells  a  mind  of  the  same  material  as  that  of  which  the  thunder¬ 
bolt  is  made.” 

To  quote  the  Swami’s  words  again:  “I  want  strength,  manhood,  kshatra- 
virya,  or  the  virility  of  a  warrior,  and  brahma-teja,  or  the  radiance  of  a  brahmin. 

.  .  .  These  men  will  stand  aside  from  the  world,  give  their  lives,  and  be  ready 
to  fight  the  battle  of  Truth,  marching  on  from  country  to  country.  One  blow 
struck  outside  of  India  is  equal  to  a  hundred  thousand  struck  within.  Well,  all 
will  come  if  the  Lord  wills  it.” 

TOUR  IN  EUROPE 

The  Swami  was  exhausted  by  his  strenuous  work  in  England.  Three  of  his 
intimate  disciples,  the  Seviers  and  Henrietta  Muller,  proposed  a  holiday  tour  on 
the  continent.  He  was  “as  delighted  as  a  child”  at  the  prospect.  “Oh!  I  long  to 
see  the  snows  and  wander  on  the  mountain  paths,”  he  said.  He  recalled  his 
travels  in  the  Himalayas.  On  July  31,  1896,  the  Swami,  in  the  company  of  his 
three  friends,  left  for  Switzerland.  They  visited  Geneva,  Mer-de-Glace,  Mon- 
treux,  Chillon,  Chamounix,  the  St.  Bernard,  Lucerne,  the  Rigi,  Zermatt,  and 
Schaffhausen.  The  Swami  felt  exhilarated  by  his  walks  in  the  Alps.  He  wanted 
to  climb  Mont  Blanc,  but  gave  up  the  idea  when  told  of  the  difficulty  of  the 


Vivekananda  103 

ascent.  He  found  that  Swiss  peasant  life  and  its  manners  and  customs  resembled 
those  of  the  people  who  dwelt  in  the  Himalayas. 

In  a  little  village  at  the  foot  of  the  Alps  between  Mont  Blanc  and  the  Little 
St.  Bernard,  he  conceived  the  idea  of  founding  a  monastery  in  the  Himalayas. 
He  said  to  his  companions:  “Oh,  I  long  for  a  monastery  in  the  Himalayas, 
where  I  can  retire  from  the  labours  of  my  life  and  spend  the  rest  of  my  days 
in  meditation.  It  will  be  a  centre  for  work  and  meditation,  where  my  Indian 
and  Western  disciples  can  live  together,  and  I  shall  train  them  as  workers.  The 
former  will  go  out  as  preachers  of  Vedanta  to  the  West,  and  the  latter  will 
devote  their  lives  to  the  good  of  India/' 

Mr.  Sevier,  speaking  for  himself  and  his  wife,  said:  “How  nice  it  would  be, 
Swami,  if  this  could  be  done.  We  must  have  such  a  monastery.” 

The  dream  was  fulfilled  through  the  Advaita  Asrama  at  Mayavati,  which 
commands  a  magnificent  view  of  the  eternal  snows  of  the  Himalayas. 

In  the  Alps  the  Swami  enjoyed  some  of  the  most  lucid  and  radiant  moments 
of  his  spiritual  life.  Sometimes  he  would  walk  alone,  absorbed  in  thought,  the 
disciples  keeping  themselves  at  a  discreet  distance.  One  of  the  disciples  said: 
“There  seemed  to  be  a  great  light  about  him,  and  a  great  stillness  and  peace. 
Never  have  I  seen  the  Swami  to  such  advantage.  He  seemed  to  communicate 
spirituality  by  a  look  or  with  a  touch.  One  could  almost  read  his  thoughts, 
which  were  of  the  highest,  so  transfigured  had  his  personality  become.” 

While  still  wandering  in  the  Alps,  the  Swami  received  a  letter  from  the 
famous  orientalist,  Paul  Deussen,  Professor  of  Philosophy  at  the  University  of 
Kiel.  The  professor  urgently  invited  the  Swami  to  visit  him.  The  Swami  ac¬ 
cepted  the  invitation  and  changed  his  itinerary.  He  arrived  at  Kiel  after  visiting 
Heidelberg,  Coblenz,  Cologne,  and  Berlin.  He  was  impressed  by  the  material 
power  and  the  great  culture  of  Germany. 

Professor  Deussen  was  well  versed  in  Sanskrit,  and  was  perhaps  the  only 
scholar  in  Europe  who  could  speak  that  language  fluently.  A  disciple  of  Schopen¬ 
hauer  and  follower  of  Kant,  Deussen  could  easily  appreciate  the  high  flights  of 
Sankaracharya’s  philosophy.  He  believed  that  the  system  of  Vedanta,  as  founded 
on  the  Upanishads  and  the  Vedanta  Sutras,  is  one  of  the  “most  majestic  struc¬ 
tures  and  valuable  products  of  the  genius  of  man  in  his  search  for  Truth,  and 
that  the  highest  and  purest  morality  is  the  immediate  consequence  of  Vedanta.” 

The  Swami  and  the  Seviers  were  cordially  received  by  the  German  scholar. 
In  the  course  of  the  conversation  Deussen  said  that  a  movement  was  being  made 
back  towards  the  fountainhead  of  spirituality,  a  movement  that  would  in  the 
future  probably  make  India  the  spiritual  leader  of  the  nations,  the  highest  and 
the  greatest  spiritual  influence  on  earth.  He  also  found  in  the  Swami  a  vivid 
demonstration  of  concentration  and  control  of  the  mind.  On  one  occasion  he 
saw  his  guest  turning  over  the  pages  of  a  poetical  work  and  did  not  receive  any 
response  to  a  query.  Afterwards  the  Swami  apologized,  saying  that  he  had  been 
so  absorbed  in  the  book  that  he  did  not  hear  the  professor.  Then  he  repeated 
the  verses  from  the  book.  The  conversation  soon  turned  to  the  power  of  con¬ 
centration  as  developed  in  the  Yoga  philosophy.  One  of  the  purposes  of  Deus- 
sen’s  meeting  the  Swami,  it  is  said,  was  his  desire  to  learn  from  the  latter  the 
secrets  of  the  Yoga  powers. 


Vivekananda 


104 

Deussen  showed  the  Swami  the  city  of  Kiel.  Thereafter  the  Swami  wished  to 
leave  immediately  for  England,  though  the  professor  insisted  that  he  should 
stay  at  Kiel  a  few  days  more.  As  that  was  not  possible,  Deussen  joined  the  party 
in  Hamburg  and  they  travelled  together  in  Holland.  After  spending  three  days 
in  Amsterdam  all  arrived  in  London,  and  for  two  weeks  Deussen  met  with  the 
Swami  daily.  The  Swami  also  visited  Max  Muller  again  at  Oxford. 

Swami  Vivekananda  spent  another  two  months  in  England,  giving  lectures 
and  seeing  important  men  of  their  day,  such  as  Edward  Carpenter,  Frederick 
Myers,  Canon  Wilberforce,  and  Moncure  D.  Conway.  The  most  notable  lec¬ 
tures  he  gave  at  this  time  were  those  on  maya,  about  which  he  spoke  on  three 
occasions,  dealing  with  its  various  aspects.  It  is  said  that  some  members  of  the 
British  royal  family  attended  these  lectures  incognito.  He  created  such  an  intense 
atmosphere  during  these  talks  that  the  whole  audience  was  transported  into  a 
realm  of  ecstatic  consciousness,  and  some  burst  into  tears.  The  lectures  were  the 
most  learned  and  eloquent  among  his  speeches  on  non-dualistic  Vedanta. 

Swami  Abhedananda  arrived  from  India,  and  Vivekananda  was  immensely 
pleased  to  have  his  brother  disciple  assist  him  in  his  foreign  work.  The  maiden 
speech  of  Abhedananda  at  a  club  in  Bloomsbury  Square,  on  October  27,  was 
highly  appreciated  by  all,  and  the  Swami  said  about  his  spiritual  brother,  “Even 
if  I  perish  on  this  plane,  my  message  will  be  sounded  through  these  dear  lips, 
and  the  world  will  hear  it.”  The  report  of  the  continued  popularity  of  Swami 
Saradananda,  who  had  in  the  meantime  gone  to  New  York,  likewise  gratified 
him. 

Despite  the  rush  of  his  European  work  Swami  Vivekananda  maintained  his 
contact  with  America.  He  took  a  personal  interest  in  the  spiritual  development 
of  his  students.  The  affectionate  relationship  of  the  Swami  with  the  Hale  family 
of  Chicago  has  been  mentioned  before,  especially  with  the  four  unmarried 
girls.  Hearing  of  the  proposed  marriage  of  Harriet,  he  wrote  to  her  on  Septem¬ 
ber  17,  1896,  “Marriage  is  the  truest  goal  for  ninety-nine  per  cent  of  the  human 
race,  and  they  will  live  the  happiest  life  as  soon  as  they  have  learnt  and  are 
ready  to  abide  by  the  eternal  lesson — that  we  are  bound  to  bear  and  forbear 
and  that  to  everyone  life  must  be  a  compromise.”  He  sent  the  young  lady  his 
blessings  in  these  terms:  “May  you  always  enjoy  the  undivided  love  of  your 
husband,  helping  him  in  attaining  all  that  is  desirable  in  this  life,  and  when 
you  have  seen  your  children’s  children,  and  the  drama  of  life  is  nearing  its  end, 
may  you  help  each  other  in  reaching  that  infinite  ocean  of  Existence,  Knowl¬ 
edge,  and  Bliss,  at  the  touch  of  whose  waters  all  distinctions  melt  away  and 
we  all  become  One.” 

But  Mary  Hale  could  not  make  a  decision  between  marriage  and  lifelong 
celibacy.  She  was  full  of  idealism  and  the  spirit  of  independence;  but  she  was 
warm  in  her  affection.  Swami  Vivekananda  was  particularly  fond  of  Mary.  On 
the  day  he  wrote  to  Harriet  he  also  wrote  to  Mary,  congratulating  Harriet  for 
her  discrimination,  and  prophesying  for  her  a  life  of  joy  and  sweetness,  since 
she  was  “not  so  imaginative  and  sentimental  as  to  make  a  fool  of  herself  and 
has  enough  of  common  sense  and  gentleness  to  soften  the  hard  points  of  life 
which  must  come  to  everyone.”  But  he  wanted  to  tell  Mary  “the  truth,  and 
my  language  is  plain.”  He  wrote: 


Vivekananda 


105 


My  dear  Mary,  I  will  tell  you  a  great  lesson  I  have  learnt  in  this  life.  It  is  this:  “The 
higher  your  ideal  is,  the  more  miserable  you  are,”  for  such  a  thing  as  an  ideal  cannot  be 
attained  in  the  world — or  in  this  life,  even.  He  who  wants  perfection  in  the  world  is  a 
madman — for  it  cannot  be.  How  can  you  find  the  infinite  in  the  finite? 

You,  Mary,  are  like  a  mettlesome  Arab — grand,  splendid.  You  would  make  a  splendid 
queen — physically,  mentally — you  would  shine  alongside  of  a  dashing,  bold,  adventurous, 
heroic  husband.  But,  my  dear  sister,  you  will  make  one  of  the  worst  wives.  You  will  take 
the  life  out  of  our  easy-going,  practical,  plodding  husbands  of  the  everyday  world.  Mind, 
my  sister,  although  it  is  true  that  there  is  much  more  romance  in  actual  life  than  in  any 
novel,  yet  it  is  few  and  far  between.  Therefore  my  advice  to  you  is  that  until  you  bring 
down  your  ideals  to  a  more  practical  level,  you  ought  not  to  marry.  If  you  do,  the  result 
will  be  misery  for  both  of  you.  In  a  few  months  you  will  lose  all  regard  for  a  common¬ 
place,  good,  nice  young  man,  and  then  life  will  become  insipid.  .  .  . 

There  are  two  sorts  of  persons  in  the  world — the  one  strong-nerved,  quiet,  yielding  to 
nature,  not  given  to  much  imagination,  yet  good,  kind,  sweet,  etc.  For  such  is  this 
world — they  alone  are  bom  to  be  happy.  There  are  others,  again,  with  high-strung 
nerves,  tremendously  imaginative,  with  intense  feeling — always  going  high,  and  coming 
down  the  next  moment.  For  them  there  is  no  happiness.  The  first  class  will  have  almost 
an  even  tenor  of  happiness.  The  second  will  have  to  run  between  ecstasy  and  misery. 
But  of  these  alone  what  we  call  geniuses  are  made.  There  is  some  truth  in  a  recent  theory 
that  genius  is  “a  sort  of  madness/' 

Now  persons  of  this  class,  if  they  want  to  be  great,  must  fight  to  be  so — clear  the  deck 
for  battle.  No  encumbrance — no  marriage — no  children,  no  undue  attachment  to  any¬ 
thing  except  the  one  idea,  and  live  and  die  for  that.  I  am  a  person  of  this  sort.  I  have 
taken  up  the  one  idea  of  “Vedanta,”  and  I  have  “cleared  the  deck  for  action.”  You  and 
Isabel  are  made  of  this  metal — but  let  me  tell  you,  though  it  is  hard,  you  are  spoiling 
your  lives  in  vain.  Either  take  up  one  idea,  clear  the  deck,  and  to  it  dedicate  the  life, 
or  be  contented  and  practical,  lower  the  ideal,  marry,  and  have  a  happy  life.  Either 
“bhoga”  or  “yoga” — either  enjoy  this  life  or  give  up  and  be  a  yogi.  None  can  have  both 
in  one.  Now  or  never — select  quick.  “He  who  is  very  particular  gets  nothing,”  says  the 
proverb.  Now  sincerely  and  really  and  for  ever  determine  to  “clear  the  deck  for  the  fight,” 
take  up  anything — philosophy  or  science  or  religion  or  literature — and  let  that  be  your 
God  for  the  rest  of  your  life.  Achieve  happiness  or  achieve  greatness.  I  have  no  sym¬ 
pathy  with  you  and  Isabel — you  are  neither  for  this  nor  for  that.  I  wish  to  see  you 
happy,  as  Harriet  is,  or  great.  Eating,  drinking,  dressing,  and  society  nonsense  are  not 
things  to  throw  away  a  life  upon — especially  for  you,  Mary.  You  are  rusting  away  a 
splendid  brain  and  abilities,  for  which  there  is  not  the  least  excuse.  You  must  have 
ambition  to  be  great.  I  know  you  will  take  these  rather  harsh  remarks  from  me  in 
the  right  spirit,  knowing  I  like  you  really  as  much  as  or  more  than  what  I  call  you, 
my  sister.  I  had  long  had  a  mind  to  tell  you  this  and  as  experience  is  gathering  I  feel 
like  telling  you.  The  joyful  news  from  Harriet  urged  me  to  tell  you  this.  I  will  be  over¬ 
joyed  to  hear  that  you  are  married  also,  and  happy  so  far  as  happiness  can  be  had  here, 
or  would  like  to  hear  of  your  doing  great  deeds. 

Mary  Hale  later  married  a  gentleman  from  Florence,  and  became  known  as 
Mme.  Matteini. 

For  some  time  the  Swami  had  been  feeling  an  inner  urge  to  return  to  India. 
From  Switzerland  he  wrote  to  friends  in  India:  “Do  not  be  afraid.  Great  things 
are  going  to  be  done,  my  children.  Take  heart.  ...  In  the  winter  I  am  going 
back  to  India  and  will  try  to  set  things  on  their  feet  there.  Work  on,  brave 


106 


Vivekananda 


hearts,  fail  not — no  saying  nay;  work  on — the  Lord  is  behind  the  work. 
Mahasakti,  the  Great  Power,  is  with  you/' 

On  November  29,  1896,  he  wrote  to  a  disciple  in  India  about  his  proposed 
Himalayan  monastery.  He  further  said  that  his  present  plan  was  to  start  two 
centres,  one  in  Madras  and  the  other  in  Calcutta,  and  later  others  in  Bombay 
and  Allahabad.  He  was  pleased  to  see  that  the  magazine  Brahmavadin,  pub¬ 
lished  in  English  in  Madras,  was  disseminating  his  ideas;  he  was  planning  to 
start  similar  magazines  in  the  vernaculars  also.  He  also  intended  to  start  a  paper, 
under  the  management  of  writers  from  all  nations,  in  order  to  spread  his  ideas 
to  every  corner  of  the  globe.  “You  must  not  forget,"  he  wrote,  “that  my  inter¬ 
ests  are  international  and  not  Indian  alone." 

Swami  Vivekananda  could  no  longer  resist  the  voice  of  India  calling  him 
back.  Sometime  during  the  middle  of  November,  after  a  class  lecture,  he 
called  Mrs.  Sevier  aside  and  quietly  asked  her  to  purchase  four  tickets  for  India. 
He  planned  to  take  with  him  the  Seviers  and  Mr.  Goodwin.  Reservations  were 
accordingly  made  on  the  “Prinz  Regent  Luitpold,"  of  the  North  German  Lloyd 
Steamship  Line,  sailing  from  Naples  for  Ceylon  on  December  20,  1896.  The 
Seviers  wanted  to  lead  a  retired  life  in  India,  practising  spiritual  disciplines  and 
helping  the  Swami  in  carrying  out  the  idea  of  building  a  monastery  in  the 
Himalayas.  Faithful  Goodwin,  who  had  already  taken  the  vows  of  a  brahma- 
charin,  would  work  as  the  Swami's  stenographer.  It  was  also  planned  that  Miss 
Muller  and  Miss  Noble  would  follow  the  party  some  time  after,  the  latter  to 
devote  her  life  to  the  cause  of  women's  education  in  India. 

The  Swami  was  given  a  magnificent  farewell  by  his  English  friends,  devotees, 
and  admirers  on  December  13  at  the  Royal  Society  of  Painters  in  Water-Colours, 
in  Piccadilly.  There  were  about  five  hundred  people  present.  Many  were  silent, 
tongue-tied  and  sad  at  heart.  Tears  were  very  near  in  some  eyes.  But  the  Swami, 
after  his  farewell  address,  walked  among  the  assembled  friends  and  repeated 
over  and  over  again,  “Yes,  yes,  we  shall  meet  again,  we  shall."  It  was  decided 
that  Swami  Abhedananda  would  continue  the  work  after  the  Swami’s  de¬ 
parture. 

Of  the  impressions  left  by  the  Swami's  teachings  in  England,  Margaret  Noble 
writes: 

To  not  a  few  of  us  the  words  of  Swami  Vivekananda  came  as  living  water  to  men 
perishing  of  thirst.  Many  of  us  have  been  conscious  for  years  past  of  that  growing  uncer¬ 
tainty  and  despair,  with  regard  to  religion,  which  has  beset  the  intellectual  life  of  Europe 
for  half  a  century.  Belief  in  the  dogmas  of  Christianity  has  become  impossible  for  us, 
and  we  had  no  tool,  such  as  now  we  hold,  by  which  to  cut  away  the  doctrinal  shell  from 
the  kernel  of  Reality,  in  our  faith.  To  these,  the  Vedanta  has  given  intellectual  con¬ 
firmation  and  philosophical  expression  of  their  own  mistrusted  intuitions.  “The  people 
that  walked  in  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light."  .  .  . 

It  was  the  Swami's  I  am  God  that  came  as  something  always  known,  only  never  said 
before.  .  .  .  Yet  again,  it  was  the  Unity  of  Man  that  was  the  touch  needed  to  rationalize 
all  previous  experiences  and  give  logical  sanction  to  the  thirst  for  absolute  service,  never 
boldly  avowed  in  the  past.  Some  by  one  gate,  and  some  by  another,  we  have  all  entered 
into  a  great  heritage,  and  we  know  it. 

The  practical  Englishman  saw  in  the  Swami’s  life  the  demonstration  of  fear- 


Vivekananda  107 

lessness  which  was  the  necessary  corollary  of  his  teaching  regarding  the  divinity 
of  the  soul.  It  was  revealed  in  many  incidents. 

One  in  particular  illustrates  this.  He  was  one  day  walking  with  Miss  Muller 
and  an  English  friend  across  some  fields  when  a  mad  bull  came  tearing  towards 
them.  The  Englishman  frankly  ran,  and  reached  the  other  side  of  the  hill  in 
safety.  Miss  Muller  ran  as  far  as  she  could,  and  then  sank  to  the  ground,  in¬ 
capable  of  further  effort.  Seeing  this,  and  unable  to  aid  her,  the  Swami — 
thinking,  “So  this  is  the  end,  after  all” — took  up  his  stand  in  front  of  her,  with 
folded  arms. 

He  told  afterwards  how  his  mind  was  occupied  with  a  mathematical  calcu¬ 
lation  as  to  how  far  the  bull  would  be  able  to  throw  him.  But  the  animal  sud¬ 
denly  stopped  a  few  paces  off,  and  then,  raising  its  head,  retreated  sullenly. 
The  Englishman  felt  ashamed  of  his  cowardly  retreat  and  of  having  left  the 
Swami  alone  to  face  the  bull.  Miss  Muller  asked  the  Swami  how  he  could 
muster  courage  in  such  a  dangerous  situation.  He  said  that  in  the  face  of  danger 
and  death  he  felt — and  he  took  two  pebbles  in  his  hands  and  struck  the  one 
against  the  other — as  strong  as  flint,  for  “I  have  touched  the  feet  of  God.” 
He  had  shown  a  like  courage  in  his  early  youth,  when  he  quickly  stepped  up 
to  a  runaway  horse  and  caught  it,  in  a  street  of  Calcutta,  thus  saving  the  life 
of  a  woman  who  occupied  the  carriage  behind. 

Regarding  his  experience  and  work  in  England,  he  told  the  Hale  sisters,  in 
a  letter,  that  it  was  a  roaring  success.  To  another  American  friend  he  wrote  that 
he  believed  in  the  power  of  the  English  to  assimilate  great  ideas,  and  that 
though  the  process  of  assimilation  might  be  slow,  it  would  be  all  the  more  sure 
and  abiding.  He  believed  that  the  time  would  come  when  distinguished  eccle¬ 
siastics  of  the  Church  of  England,  imbued  with  the  idealism  of  Vedanta, 
would  form  a  liberal  community  within  the  Anglican  Church  itself,  supporting 
the  universality  of  religion  both  in  vision  and  in  practice. 

But  what  he  admired  most  in  England  was  the  character  of  the  English 
people — their  steadiness,  thoroughness,  loyalty,  devotion  to  the  ideal,  and 
perseverance  to  finish  any  work  that  they  undertook.  His  preconceived  idea 
about  the  English  was  thoroughly  changed  when  he  came  to  know  them  inti¬ 
mately.  “No  one,”  he  said  later,  addressing  the  Hindus  of  Calcutta,  “ever 
landed  on  English  soil  feeling  more  hatred  in  his  heart  for  a  race  than  I  did  for 
the  English.  [The  iniquities  of  the  colonial  rule  in  India  were  deeply  impressed 
in  his  mind.]  .  .  .  There  is  none  among  you  who  loves  the  English  people  more 
than  I  do.” 

He  wrote  to  the  Hale  sisters  on  November  28,  1896:  “The  English  are  not 
so  bright  as  the  Americans,  but  once  you  touch  their  heart  it  is  yours  for  ever. 

.  .  .  I  now  understand  why  the  Lord  has  blessed  them  above  all  other  races — 
steady,  sincere  to  the  backbone,  with  great  depths  of  feeling,  only  with  a  crust 
of  stoicism  on  the  surface.  If  that  is  broken  you  have  your  man.”  In  another 
letter:  “You  know,  of  course,  the  steadiness  of  the  English;  they  are,  of  all 
nations,  least  jealous  of  each  other  and  that  is  why  they  dominate  the  world. 
They  have  solved  the  secret  of  obedience  without  slavish  cringing — great  free¬ 
dom  with  law-abidingness.”  On  still  another  occasion  he  called  the  English 
“a  nation  of  heroes,  the  true  kshattriyas.  .  .  .  Their  education  is  to  hide  their 


108 


Vivekananda 


feelings  and  never  to  show  them.  If  you  know  how  to  reach  the  English  heart, 
he  is  your  friend  for  ever.  If  he  has  once  an  idea  put  into  his  brain,  it  never 
comes  out;  and  the  immense  practicality  and  energy  of  the  race  makes  it  sprout 
up  and  immediately  bear  fruit/' 

The  Swami  felt  that  the  finger  of  God  had  brought  about  the  contact  be¬ 
tween  India  and  England.  The  impact  created  by  the  aggressive  British  rule, 
on  the  one  hand,  awakened  the  Hindu  race  from  its  slumber  of  ages,  and  on 
the  other  hand,  offered  India  opportunities  to  spread  her  spiritual  message 
throughout  the  Western  world. 

He  wrote  to  Mr.  Leggett  on  }uly  6,  1896: 

The  British  Empire  with  all  its  evils  is  the  greatest  machine  that  ever  existed  for  the 
dissemination  of  ideas.  I  mean  to  put  my  ideas  in  the  centre  of  this  machine,  and  it  will 
spread  them  all  over  the  world.  Of  course,  all  great  work  is  slow  and  the  difficulties  are 
too  many,  especially  as  we  Hindus  are  a  conquered  race.  Yet  that  is  the  very  reason  why 
it  is  bound  to  work,  for  spiritual  ideals  have  always  come  from  the  downtrodden.  The 
downtrodden  Jews  overwhelmed  the  Roman  Empire  with  their  spiritual  ideals.  You 
will  be  pleased  to  learn  that  I  am  also  learning  my  lesson  every  day  in  patience  and  above 
all  in  sympathy.  I  think  I  am  beginning  to  see  the  Divine  even  inside  the  bullying 
Anglo  Indians.  I  think  I  am  slowly  approaching  to  that  state  when  I  would  be  able  to 
love  the  very  “Devil'’  himself,  if  there  were  any. 

Though  Swami  Vivekananda  himself  spoke  highly  of  the  effect  of  his  teach¬ 
ings  in  England,  he  did  not  start  any  organized  work  there  as  he  did  in  the 
United  States  of  America.  From  his  letters  and  conversations  one  learns  that  he 
was  growing  weary  of  the  world.  Though  he  was  at  the  peak  of  his  success,  as 
far  as  public  activity  was  concerned,  he  began  to  feel  a  longing  for  the  peace  that 
comes  from  total  absorption  in  the  Supreme  Spirit.  He  sensed  that  his  earthly 
mission  was  over.  On  August  23,  1896,  he  wrote  to  a  friend,  from  Lucerne: 

“I  have  begun  the  work,  let  others  work  it  out.  So  you  see,  to  set  the  work 
going  I  had  to  defile  myself  by  touching  money  and  property  for  a  time.17 
Now  I  am  sure  my  part  of  the  work  has  been  done,  and  I  have  no  more  interest 
in  Vedanta  or  any  philosophy  in  the  world,  or  in  the  work  itself.  I  am  getting 
ready  to  depart,  to  return  no  more  to  this  hell,  this  world.  .  .  .  Even  its  religious 
utility  is  beginning  to  pall  on  me.  .  .  .  These  works  and  doing  good,  and  so 
forth,  are  just  a  little  exercise  to  cleanse  the  mind.  I  have  had  enough  of  it.”18 
He  was  losing  interest  even  in  the  American  programme,  which  he  himself  had 
organized. 

In  the  letter  quoted  above,  the  Swami  wrote:  “If  New  York  or  Boston  or  any 
other  place  in  the  U.  S.  needs  Vedanta  teachers,  they  must  receive  them,  keep 
them,  and  provide  for  them.  As  for  me,  I  am  as  good  as  retired.  I  have  played 
my  part  in  the  world."  To  Swami  Abhedananda  he  confided  one  day,  about 
this  time,  that  he  was  going  to  live  for  five  or  six  years  at  the  most.  The  brother 
disciple  said  in  protest  that  he  was  a  young  man  and  that  he  should  not  think 
of  death.  “But,"  Vivekananda  said,  “you  are  a  fool;  you  do  not  understand. 

17  Where  money  was  concerned,  he  shared  the  physical  repulsion  towards  it  of  Sri 
Ramakrishna. 

18  That  work  serves  as  a  discipline  for  the  realization  of  freedom,  and  is  not  freedom 
itself,  has  been  fully  discussed  by  Swami  Vivekananda  in  his  Karma-Yoga. 


Vivekananda  109 

My  soul  is  getting  bigger  and  bigger  every  day;  the  body  can  hardly  contain 
it.  Any  day  it  may  burst  this  cage  of  flesh  and  bone!" 

The  world  was  leaving  him.  The  string  of  the  kite  by  which  it  was  fastened 
to  earth  was  breaking. 

The  reader  may  recall  that  Sri  Ramakrishna  spoke  of  Vivekananda  as  a  free 
soul  whom  he  had  dragged  down  from  the  realm  of  the  Absolute  to  help  him 
in  his  mission  on  earth.  A  temporary  veil,  necessary  for  physical  embodiment 
and  work,  was  put  on  this  soul  so  that  it  might  dwell  in  the  world  to  help  men 
in  their  search  for  spiritual  freedom.  But  now,  as  the  veil  was  becoming  thinner, 
the  Swami  began  to  get  a  glimpse  of  the  real  freedom.  He  realized  that  the 
world  was  the  lila,  the  play,  of  the  Divine  Mother,  and  it  would  continue  as 
long  as  She  wanted  it.  On  August  8,  1896,  he  wrote  from  Switzerland  to 
Goodwin: 

I  am  much  refreshed  now.  I  look  out  of  the  window  and  see  the  huge  glaciers  just 
before  me — and  feel  that  I  am  in  the  Himalayas.  I  am  quite  calm.  My  nerves  have 
regained  their  accustomed  strength,  and  little  vexations  like  those  you  write  of  do  not 
touch  me  at  all.  How  shall  I  be  disturbed  by  this  child’s  play?  The  whole  world  is  mere 
child’s  play — preaching,  teaching,  and  all  included.  ‘‘Know  him  to  be  a  sannyasin  who 
neither  hates  nor  desires.”  What  is  to  be  desired  in  this  little  mud-puddle  of  a  world, 
with  its  ever  recurring  misery,  disease,  and  death?  “He  who  has  given  up  all  desires,  he 
alone  is  happy.”  This  rest — eternal,  peaceful  rest — I  am  catching  a  glimpse  of  it  now 
in  this  beautiful  spot.  “If  a  man  knows  the  Atman  as  ‘I  am  this/  then  desiring  what 
and  for  whose  sake  will  he  suffer  in  the  wake  of  the  body?” 

I  feel  as  if  I  have  had  my  share  of  experience  in  what  they  call  “work.”  I  am  finished. 

I  am  longing  to  get  out  now. 

With  this  growing  detachment  from  the  world,  the  idea  of  good  and  evil, 
without  the  consciousness  of  which  no  work  is  possible,  began  to  drop  away. 
The  Swami  was  realizing  an  intense  love  for  God.  In  that  mood  a  great  ex¬ 
altation  would  come  over  him,  and  the  whole  universe  would  seem  to  him 
an  Eternal  Garden  where  an  Eternal  Child  plays  an  Eternal  Game.  In  that 
mood  of  delirious  joy  he  had  written  on  July  6,  1896,  to  Francis  Leggett,  his 
friend  and  disciple: 

At  twenty  I  was  a  most  unsympathetic,  uncompromising  fanatic.  I  would  not  walk  on 
the  foot-path  on  the  theatre  side  of  the  street  in  Calcutta.  At  thirty-three  I  can  live  in  the 
same  house  with  prostitutes  and  never  would  think  of  saying  a  word  of  reproach  to  them. 
Is  it  degeneration?  Or  is  it  that  I  am  broadening  out  into  that  universal  love  which  is 
the  Lord  Himself?  .  .  .  Some  days  I  get  into  a  sort  of  ecstasy.  I  feel  that  I  must  bless 
everyone,  every  being,  love  and  embrace  every  being,  and  I  literally  see  that  evil  is  a 
delusion.  ...  I  bless  the  day  I  was  born.  I  have  had  so  much  of  kindness  and  love  here, 
and  that  Love  Infinite  who  brought  me  into  being  has  guided  every  one  of  my  actions, 
good  or  bad  (don’t  be  frightened);  for  what  am  I,  what  was  I  ever,  but  a  tool  in  His 
hands — for  whose  service  I  have  given  up  everything — my  Beloved,  my  Joy,  my  Life, 
my  Soul?  He  is  my  playful  darling,  I  am  His  playfellow.  There  is  neither  rhyme  nor 
reason  in  the  universe.  What  reason  binds  Him?  He,  the  Playful  One,  is  playing — these 
tears  and  laughter  are  all  parts  of  the  play.  Great  fun,  great  fun!  as  Joe19  says. 

It  is  a  funny  world,  and  the  funniest  chap  you  ever  saw  is  He,  the  Beloved.  Infinite 


19  Referring  to  Miss  MacLeod. 


110 


Vivekananda 


fun,  is  it  not?  Brotherhood  or  playmatehood?  A  shoal  of  romping  children  let  out  to  play 
in  this  playground  of  the  world,  isn’t  it?  Whom  to  praise,  whom  to  blame?  It  is  all 
His  play.  They  want  an  explanation,  but  how  can  you  explain  Him?  He  is  brain  less, 
nor  has  He  any  reason.  He  is  fooling  us  with  little  brains  and  reasons,  but  this  time 
He  won’t  find  me  napping — “you  bet.”  I  have  learnt  a  thing  or  two.  Beyond,  beyond 
reason  and  learning  and  talking  is  the  feeling,  the  “Love,”  the  “Beloved.”  Ay,  “Sake,”20 
fill  the  cup  and  we  will  be  mad. — Yours  ever  in  madness,  Vivekananda. 


In  a  philosophical  mood  he  spoke  about  the  illusion  of  progress.  He  did  not 
believe  in  the  possibility  of  transforming  this  earth  into  a  heaven  where  misery 
would  be  totally  eliminated  and  happiness  alone  would  reign  in  its  place. 
True  freedom  and  bliss  could  be  attained  only  by  the  individual  and  not  by  the 
masses  as  a  whole.  He  wrote  to  Goodwin  on  August  8,  1896:  “  ‘A  good  world,' 
‘a  happy  world,'  'social  progress’  are  equally  intelligible  as  ‘hot  ice,’  ‘dark 
light,’  etc.  If  it  were  good  it  would  not  be  the  world.  The  soul  foolishly 
thinks  of  manifesting  the  Infinite  in  finite  matter — the  intelligence  through 
gross  particles — and  at  last  finds  out  its  error  and  tries  to  escape.  This  going 
back  is  the  beginning  of  religion,  and  its  method,  destruction  of  self,  that 
is,  love.  Not  love  for  wife  or  child  or  anybody  else,  but  love  for  everything 
else  except  this  little  self.  Never  be  deluded  by  the  tall  talk,  of  which  you 
will  hear  a  lot  in  America,  about  ‘human  progress’  and  such  stuff.  There  is 
no  progress  without  regression.” 

On  November  1,  1896,  in  the  course  of  a  letter  to  Mary  Hale,  Swami  Vive¬ 
kananda  wrote  from  London: 

“An  objective  heaven  or  millennium  therefore  has  existence  only  in  the  fancy, 
but  a  subjective  one  is  already  in  existence.  The  musk-deer,  after  vain  search  for 
the  cause  of  the  scent  of  the  musk,  at  last  will  have  to  find  it  in  himself.” 

But  Swami  Vivekananda’s  mission  to  the  world  was  not  yet  finished.  An 
arduous  task  was  awaiting  him  in  his  beloved  motherland.  The  Indian  work 
had  to  be  organized  before  he  could  bid  farewell  to  this  earth.  He  left  England 
on  December  16,  1896,  and  travelled  overland  for  the  port  of  departure  at 
Naples. 

The  party  headed  directly  for  Milan,  passing  through  Dover,  Calais,  and 
Mont  Cenis.  The  Swami  enjoyed  the  railroad  journey  and  entertained  his 
companions,  the  Seviers,  with  his  stimulating  conversation.  But  a  part  of  his 
mind  was  drawn  to  India.  He  said  to  the  Seviers:  “Now  I  have  but  one  thought, 
and  that  is  India.  I  am  looking  forward  to  India.”  On  the  eve  of  his  departure 
from  London,  an  English  friend  had  asked  him,  “Swami,  how  will  you  like 
your  motherland  after  three  years’  experience  in  the  luxurious  and  powerful 
West?”  His  significant  reply  was:  “India  I  loved  before  I  came  away.  Now  the 
very  dust  of  India  has  become  holy  to  me,  the  very  air  is  now  holy  to  me;  it  is 
the  holy  land,  the  place  of  pilgrimage.”  Often  the  Swami  said  that  the  West 
was  the  karma-bhumi,  the  land  of  action,  where  through  selfless  work  a  man 
purified  his  heart;  and  India  was  the  punya-bhumi,  the  land  of  holiness,  where 
the  pure  in  heart  communed  with  God. 

In  Milan  the  Swami  was  much  impressed  by  the  great  cathedral  and  by 


20  Friend. 


Vivekananda 


111 


Leonardo's  “Last  Supper.”  Pisa,  with  the  leaning  tower,  and  Florence,  with  its 
magnificent  achievements  in  art,  immensely  delighted  him.  But  the  peak  of  his 
happiness  was  reserved  for  Rome,  where  he  spent  Christmas  week.  Many  things 
there  reminded  him  of  India:  the  tonsure  of  the  priests,  the  incense,  the  music, 
the  various  ceremonies  of  the  Catholic  Church,  and  the  Holy  Sacrament — the 
last  of  these  recalling  to  his  mind  the  prasadam  of  the  Hindu  temples,  the  food 
partaken  of  by  devotees  after  it  has  been  offered  to  God. 

When  asked  by  a  lady  companion  about  the  church  ritual,  the  Swami  said, 
“If  you  love  the  Personal  God,  then  give  Him  your  best — incense,  flowers,  fruit, 
and  silk.”  But  he  was  a  little  bewildered  by  the  imposing  High  Mass  at  St. 
Peter’s  on  Christmas  Day,  and  whispered  to  the  Seviers:  “Why  all  this  pageantry 
and  ostentatious  show?  Can  it  be  possible  that  the  Church  which  loves  such  a 
display  of  pomp  and  ceremonies  is  the  true  follower  of  the  humble  Jesus,  who 
had  nowhere  to  lay  his  head?”  He  could  never  forget  that  Christ  was  a  sannyasin, 
a  world-renouncing  monk,  and  that  the  essence  of  his  teachings  was  renunciation 
and  detachment. 

He  enjoyed  his  visit  to  the  catacombs,  associated  with  the  memories  of  early 
Christian  martyrs  and  saints.  The  Christmas  festival  at  Santa-Maria  d’Ara  Coeli, 
with  the  stalls  where  sweets,  toys,  and  cheap  pictures  of  the  Bambino  were  sold, 
reminded  him  of  similar  religious  fairs  in  India.  Christmas  in  Rome  filled  his 
heart  with  a  warm  devotion  for  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  an  Asiatic  and  whom 
Asia  had  offered  to  the  West  as  a  gift  to  awaken  its  spiritual  consciousness. 

The  Swami  spent  a  few  days  in  Naples,  visiting  Vesuvius,  Pompeii,  and  other 
places  of  interest.  Then  the  ship  at  last  arrived  from  Southampton  with  Mr. 
Goodwin  as  one  of  her  passengers.  The  Swami  and  his  friends  sailed  from 
Naples  on  December  30,  1896,  expecting  to  arrive  in  Colombo  on  January  15, 
1897. 

On  board  the  ship  the  Swami  had  a  significant  vision.  One  night,  somewhere 
between  Naples  and  Port  Said,  he  saw  in  a  vivid  dream  a  venerable,  bearded  old 
man,  like  a  rishi  of  India,  who  said:  “Observe  carefully  this  place.  You  are  now 
in  the  Island  of  Crete.  This  is  the  land  where  Christianity  began.  I  am  one 
of  the  Therapeutae  who  used  to  live  here.”  The  apparition  uttered  another 
word,  which  the  Swami  could  not  remember.  It  might  have  been  “Essene,” 
a  sect  to  which  John  the  Baptist  belonged. 

Both  the  Therapeutae  and  the  Essenes  had  practised  renunciation  and 
cherished  a  liberal  religious  outlook.  According  to  some  scholars,  the  word 
Therapeutae  may  be  derived  from  the  Buddhist  word  sthaviraputta,  meaning 
the  sons  or  disciples  of  the  Theras,  or  Elders,  the  superiors  among  the  Buddhist 
monks.  The  word  Essene  may  have  some  relation  with  Isiyana,  meaning  the 
Path  of  the  Lord,  a  well-known  sect  of  Buddhist  monks.  It  is  now  admitted 
that  the  Buddhists  at  an  early  time  had  monasteries  in  Asia  Minor,  Egypt,  and 
generally  along  the  eastern  part  of  the  Mediterranean. 

The  old  man  in  the  dream  concluded  his  statement  by  saying:  “The  truths 
and  ideas  preached  by  us  were  presented  as  the  teachings  of  Jesus.  But  Jesus 
the  person  was  never  born.  Various  proofs  attesting  this  fact  will  be  brought 
to  light  when  this  place  is  dug  up.”  At  that  moment — it  was  midnight — the 


112  Vivekananda 

Swami  awoke  and  asked  a  sailor  where  the  ship  was;  he  was  told  that  it  was 
fifty  miles  off  Crete. 

The  Swami  was  startled  at  this  singular  coincidence.  The  idea  flashed  in 
his  mind  that  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  might  have  been  an  older  record  than 
the  Gospels,  and  that  Buddhist  thought,  coming  through  the  Therapeutae  and 
the  Essenes,  might  have  helped  in  the  formulation  of  Christianity.  The  person 
of  Christ  might  be  a  later  addition.  He  knew  that  Alexandria  had  been  a  meet¬ 
ing-place  of  Indian  and  Egyptian  thought.  Later,  when  the  old  sites  in  Crete 
were  excavated,  evidence  was  found  connecting  early  Christianity  with  foreign 
sources. 

But  Swami  Vivekananda  never  refused  to  accept  the  historical  Christ.  Like 
Krishna,  Christ,  too,  has  been  revealed  in  the  spiritual  experiences  of  many 
saints.  That,  for  Vivekananda,  conferred  upon  him  a  reality  which  was  more 
real  than  historical  realities.  While  travelling  in  Switzerland,  the  Swami  one 
day  plucked  some  wild  flowers  and  asked  Mrs.  Sevier  to  offer  them  at  the  feet 
of  the  Virgin  in  a  little  chapel  in  the  mountains,  with  the  remark,  “She  too 
is  the  Mother.”  One  of  his  disciples,  another  day,  gave  him  a  picture  of  the 
Sistine  Madonna  to  bless.  But  he  refused  in  all  humility,  and  piously  touching 
the  feet  of  the  child  said,  “I  would  have  washed  his  feet,  not  with  my  tears, 
but  with  my  heart’s  blood.”  It  may  be  remembered  that  the  monastic  Order 
of  Ramakrishna  was  started  on  Christmas  Eve. 

During  the  two  weeks’  voyage,  Swami  Vivekananda  had  ample  time  to  reflect 
on  the  experiences  of  his  three  years  in  the  Western  world.  His  mind  was  filled 
with  memories  of  sweet  friendship,  unflinching  devotion,  and  warm  apprecia¬ 
tion  from  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  Three  years  before,  he  had  come  to  Amer¬ 
ica,  unknown  and  penniless,  and  was  regarded  somewhat  as  a  curiosity  from 
the  glamorous  and  inscrutable  East.  Now  he  was  returning  to  his  native  land, 
a  hero  and  prophet  worshipped  by  hundreds  and  admired  by  thousands.  Guided 
by  the  finger  of  God  he  had  gone  to  Chicago.  In  the  New  World  he  had  seen 
life  at  its  best  and  its  worst.  He  found  there  a  society  based  on  the  ideals  of 
equality,  justice,  and  freedom,  where  a  man — in  sad  contrast  with  India — 
was  given  every  opportunity  to  develop  his  potentialities.  There  the  common 
people  had  reached  a  high  standard  of  living  and  enjoyed  their  well-earned  pros¬ 
perity  in  a  way  unimaginable  in  any  other  part  of  the  world.  The  American  mind 
was  alert,  inquisitive,  daring,  receptive,  and  endowed  with  a  rare  ethical  sensitiv¬ 
ity.  He  saw  in  America,  in  her  men  and  women  of  letters,  wealth,  and  position, 
sparks  of  spirituality  which  kindled  at  the  touch  of  his  magic  words.  He  was 
impressed  to  see  the  generous  confidence  and  richness  of  heart  manifested 
through  the  pure  and  candid  souls  who  gave  themselves  to  him  once  they  had 
recognized  him  as  a  trustworthy  spiritual  guide.  They  became  his  noble  friends 
and  slaves  of  love,  and  did  not  shrink  from  the  highest  sacrifice  to  help  in  the 
fulfilment  of  his  mission. 

But  withal,  the  Swami  saw  the  vulgarity,  garishness,  greed,  lust  for  power, 
and  sensuality  among  this  vast  country’s  heterogeneous  elements.  People  had 
been  swept  off  their  feet  by  the  newly  acquired  prosperity  created  with  the 
aid  of  science,  technology,  and  human  ingenuity.  They  often  appeared  to  him 
naive  and  noisy,  and  he  may  have  wondered  if  this  new  nation,  Yenfant  terrible, 


Vivekananda 


113 


the  last  hope  of  Western  culture  and  also  the  source  of  potential  fear  for  the 
rest  of  the  world,  would  measure  up  to  the  expectations  of  its  Founding  Fathers 
and  act  as  the  big  brother  of  the  world,  sharing  with  all  the  material  amenities 
of  life. 

America  had  given  him  the  first  recognition  and  he  was  aware  of  it.  In 
America  he  had  started  the  work  of  Vedanta  in  an  organized  form,  and  he  hoped 
America  would  be  the  spiritual  bridge  between  the  East  and  the  West.  Though 
his  scholarly  and  conservative  mind  often  felt  at  home  among  the  intellectuals 
of  England  and  Germany,  yet  to  America  his  heart  was  devoted.  The  monu¬ 
ments  of  Western  culture  no  doubt  fascinated  him,  but,  as  he  wrote  to  Mary 
Hale  from  London,  in  May  1896:  “I  love  the  Yankee  land — I  like  to  see  new 
things.  I  do  not  care  a  fig  to  loaf  about  old  ruins  and  mope  a  life  out  about  old 
histories  and  keep  sighing  about  the  ancients.  I  have  too  much  vigour  in  my 
blood  for  that.  In  America  is  the  place,  the  people,  the  opportunity  for  every¬ 
thing  new.  I  have  become  horribly  radical.” 

In  that  same  letter  he  wrote,  too,  that  he  wished  he  could  infuse  some  of 
the  American  spirit  into  India,  into  “that  awful  mass  of  conservative  jelly-fish, 
and  then  throw  overboard  all  old  associations  and  start  a  new  thing,  entirely 
new — simple,  strong,  new  and  fresh  as  the  first-born  baby — throw  all  of  the 
past  overboard  and  begin  anew.” 

Swami  Vivekananda  bestowed  equally  high  praise  upon  the  Englishman. 
He  felt  that  in  a  sense  his  work  in  England  was  more  satisfactory  than  his 
work  in  America.  There  he  transformed  the  life  of  individuals.  Goodwin  and 
Margaret  Noble  embraced  his  cause  as  their  own,  and  the  Seviers  accompanied 
him  to  India,  deserting  Europe  and  all  their  past  to  follow  him. 

But  what  of  Swami  Vivekananda’s  early  dream  of  gathering  from  America 
the  material  treasures  to  remedy  the  sufferings  of  the  Indian  masses  and  raise 
their  standard  of  living?  He  had  come  to  America  to  obtain,  in  exchange  for 
India's  spiritual  wealth,  the  needed  monetary  help  and  scientific  and  technolog¬ 
ical  knowledge  to  rebuild  the  physical  health  of  his  own  people.  Though  on 
his  return  he  did  not  take  with  him  American  scientists  and  technologists,  or 
carry  in  his  pocket  gold  and  silver  from  the  New  World,  yet  he  had  left  behind 
a  vast  storehouse  of  goodwill  and  respect  for  India.  He  had  been  India’s  first 
spiritual  ambassador  to  America,  India’s  herald,  who,  remembering  the  dignity 
of  the  royal  land  whence  he  had  come,  had  spoken  in  her  name  and  delivered 
her  message  with  appropriate  dignity. 

The  full  effect  of  this  contact  will  be  known  only  in  years  to  come;  but  a 
beginning  can  be  seen  even  now.  Half  a  century  after  Swami  Vivekananda’s  visit 
to  America,  India  gained  her  freedom  from  British  rule.  When  she  thus  obtained 
facilities  to  arrange  her  national  affairs  in  her  own  way,  India  sent  thousands  of 
students  to  the  New  World  to  acquire  advanced  knowledge  in  the  physical 
sciences  and  technology.  Further,  American  money  is  now  being  spent  to 
improve  the  material  condition  of  the  Indian  masses.  Thus  it  appears  that,  after 
all,  Swami  Vivekananda  was  not  a  mere  visionary,  but  had  insight  into  the 
shape  of  things  to  come. 

The  immediate  task  before  him,  the  Swami  felt,  was  to  work  for  India’s 
regeneration  from  within  the  country  itself.  India  could  be  liberated  by  her 


114 


Vivekananda 


own  efforts  alone.  But  he  was  carrying  from  the  West  a  priceless  asset  to  help 
him  in  his  herculean  task:  The  West  had  given  him  an  authority  which,  it 
appears,  he  did  not  have  before  in  the  land  of  his  birth.  He  had  been  successful 
in  planting  the  seeds  of  India’s  spiritual  ideas  in  the  very  heart  of  the  English- 
speaking  world — in  New  York  and  London.  Did  he  know  then  that  within  a 
half  century  these  ideas  would  be  broadcast  over  the  Western  world,  and  earn 
its  respect  for  his  motherland?  Though  he  had  come  to  America  as  a  giver, 
he  was  now,  in  a  sense,  going  back  to  India  as  a  gift  from  the  New  World. 

THE  RETURN  TO  INDIA 

Swami  Vivekananda  enjoyed  the  sea  voyage  back  to  India,  relaxing  from 
his  strenuous  activities  in  the  West.  But  his  mind  was  full  of  ideas  regarding 
his  future  plan  of  work  in  his  motherland. 

There  were  on  the  boat,  among  other  passengers,  two  Christian  mission¬ 
aries  who,  in  the  course  of  a  heated  discussion  with  the  Swami,  lost  their 
tempers  and  savagely  criticized  the  Hindu  religion.  The  Swami  walked  to  one 
of  them,  seized  him  by  the  collar,  and  said  menacingly,  “If  you  abuse  my 
religion  again,  I  will  throw  you  overboard.” 

“Let  me  go,  sir,”  the  frightened  missionary  apologized;  “I’ll  never  do  it 
again.” 

Later,  in  the  course  of  a  conversation  with  a  disciple  in  Calcutta,  he  asked, 
“What  would  you  do  if  someone  insulted  your  mother?”  The  disciple  answered, 
“I  would  fall  upon  him,  sir,  and  teach  him  a  good  lesson.” 

“Bravo!”  said  the  Swami.  “Now,  if  you  had  the  same  positive  feeling  for  your 
religion,  your  true  mother,  you  could  never  see  any  Hindu  brother  converted 
to  Christianity.  Yet  you  see  this  occurring  every  day,  and  you  are  quite  indif¬ 
ferent.  Where  is  your  faith?  Where  is  your  patriotism?  Every  day  Christian 
missionaries  abuse  Hinduism  to  your  face,  and  yet  how  many  are  there  amongst 
you  whose  blood  boils  with  righteous  indignation  and  who  will  stand  up  in  its 
defense?” 

When  the  boat  stopped  at  Aden,  the  party  went  ashore  and  visited  the  places 
of  interest.  The  Swami  saw  from  a  distance  a  Hindusthani  betel-leaf  seller  smok¬ 
ing  his  hookah,  or  hubble-bubble.  He  had  not  enjoyed  this  Indian  way  of  smok¬ 
ing  for  the  past  three  years.  Going  up  to  him,  the  Swami  said,  “Brother,  do  give 
me  your  pipe.”  Soon  he  was  puffing  at  it  with  great  joy  and  talking  to  him  as 
to  an  intimate  friend. 

Mr.  Sevier  later  on  said  to  Swamiji  teasingly:  “Now  we  see!  It  was  this  pipe 
that  made  you  run  away  from  us  so  abruptly!”  Speaking  of  this  incident,  the 
Swami’s  companions  said  later:  “The  shopkeeper  could  not  have  resisted  him; 
for  he  had  such  an  endearing  way  about  him,  when  asking  for  anything,  that 
he  was  simply  irresistible.  We  shall  never  forget  that  ingenuous  look  on  his 
face  when  he  said  to  the  shopkeeper,  with  childlike  sweetness,  ‘Brother,  do 
give  me  your  pipe.’  ” 

In  the  early  morning  of  January  15,  1897,  the  coast  of  Ceylon  with  its 
majestic  coco  palms  and  gold-coloured  beach  was  seen  at  a  distance.  The 
Swami’s  heart  leapt  with  joy;  and  his  disciples  caught  his  excitement  as  the  boat 


Vivekananda  115 

approached  the  beautiful  harbour  of  Colombo.  But  no  one  in  the  party  had 
the  slightest  idea  of  what  they  were  to  witness  while  disembarking. 

Since  the  day  of  his  success  at  the  Parliament  of  Religions  in  Chicago,  which 
had  filled  with  joy  and  pride  the  hearts  of  his  countrymen,  especially  of  his 
disciples  and  brother  monks  at  the  Baranagore  Math,  Swami  Vivekananda  had 
been  inspiring  his  faithful  followers  to  lay  down  their  lives  for  the  uplift  of 
the  masses  of  India,  and  in  particular  to  help  the  hungry  and  illiterate.  In  his 
heart  of  hearts  he  felt  that  India  would  not  be  able  to  resist  his  appeal.  Many 
months  before,  while  discussing  with  some  of  his  disciples  in  Detroit  the  great 
difficulties  that  he  had  encountered  in  presenting  Hinduism  to  bigoted  Chris¬ 
tians  in  America,  he  had  said:  “But  India  shall  listen  to  me.  I  will  shake  India 
to  her  foundations.  I  will  send  an  electric  thrill  through  her  veins.  Wait!  You 
will  see  how  India  receives  me.  It  is  India,  my  own  India,  that  knows  truly 
how  to  appreciate  what  I  have  given  so  freely  here,  and  with  my  life’s  blood. 
India  will  receive  me  in  triumph.” 

When  the  news  of  Swami  Vivekananda’s  departure  from  Europe  reached 
India,  the  hearts  of  the  people  were  stirred.  The  spiritual  ambassador  of  their 
ancient  land  was  coming  back  after  fulfilling  his  mission.  They  must  give  a 
regal  welcome  to  this  great  crusader.  In  big  towns  committees  were  formed  for 
his  reception.  His  brother  disciples  and  friends  were  impatient.  Swami  Shiv- 
ananda  came  ahead  of  time  to  Madras  and  Swami  Niranjanananda  to  Colombo; 
so  also  many  of  his  disciples  from  Bengal  and  the  Northern  Provinces  came  to 
Madras  to  await  his  arrival.  The  newspapers  published  articles  eulogizing  his 
personality  and  work. 

A  gaily  decorated  steam  launch  carried  the  Swami  and  his  party  from  the 
ship  to  the  harbour.  When  the  monk  with  his  yellow  robe  and  luminous  eyes 
touched  the  dust  of  his  motherland,  a  mighty  shout  arose  from  the  human 
throng  crowding  the  quays.  Thousands  flung  themselves  on  the  ground  to 
touch  his  feet.  A  deputation  of  the  notables  of  Ceylon  welcomed  him,  and  he 
was  taken  in  a  huge  procession  through  many  triumphal  arches.  Flags  were 
unfurled,  religious  hymns  chanted;  an  Indian  band  played.  Rose-water  and  the 
sacred  water  of  the  Ganges  were  sprinkled  before  him,  and  flowers  were  strewn 
in  his  path.  Incense  was  burnt  before  the  houses  as  he  passed.  Fruit  and  other 
offerings  were  brought  by  hundreds  of  visitors. 

Swami  Vivekananda  accepted  all  these  honours  without  losing  his  poise. 
He  was  not  the  man  to  flee  from  triumph  any  more  than  from  battle.  He 
regarded  the  tributes  paid  to  him,  a  penniless  beggar,  as  tributes  paid  to  the 
spiritual  ideal  of  India.  In  the  course  of  his  reply  to  the  address  of  welcome 
given  in  Colombo,  he  said:  “The  spirituality  of  the  Hindus  is  revealed  by  the 
princely  reception  which  they  have  given  to  a  beggar  sannyasin.”  He  pointed 
out  that  though  he  was  not  a  military  general,  not  a  prince  nor  a  wealthy  man, 
yet  men  great  in  the  transitory  possessions  of  the  world  and  much  respected 
by  society  had  nevertheless  come  to  honour  him,  a  homeless  monk.  “This,” 
he  exclaimed,  “is  one  of  the  highest  expressions  of  spirituality.”  He  disclaimed 
any  personal  glory  in  the  welcome  he  received,  insisting  that  it  was  but  the 
recognition  of  a  principle. 

Swami  Vivekananda’s  progress  from  Colombo  to  Madras  and  the  welcomes 


116 


Vivekananda 


he  received  at  Kandy,  Anuruddhapura,  [affna,  Pamban,  Rameswaram,  Ramnad, 
Paramakudi,  Madura,  Trichinopoly,  and  Kumbhakonum  demonstrated  how 
deeply  he  had  endeared  himself  to  the  men  and  women  of  India.  At  Anurud¬ 
dhapura  a  band  of  fanatical  Buddhists  tried  to  break  up  the  meeting,  but  did 
not  succeed.  At  Rameswaram  the  Swami  exhorted  the  people  to  “worship  Siva 
in  the  poor,  the  diseased,  and  the  weak." 

He  received  a  touching  welcome  there  from  the  Raja  of  Ramnad,  his  dis¬ 
ciple,  who  had  encouraged  him  to  go  to  America  and  had  helped  him  materially 
for  that  purpose.  At  Ramnad  the  horses  were  unhitched  from  the  carriage 
bearing  the  Swami,  and  the  people  themselves,  the  Raja  among  them,  drew  it. 
At  Rameswaram  the  Raja  erected,  in  the  Swami’s  honour,  a  victory  column 
forty  feet  high  with  a  suitable  inscription.  He  also  gave  a  liberal  donation  to 
the  Madras  famine-relief  fund  to  commemorate  the  home-coming  of  the 
Swami. 

At  a  small  railroad  station  near  Madras,  hundreds  of  people  gathered  for  a 
glimpse  of  Vivekananda.  The  stationmaster  did  not  want  to  delay  the  train 
since  no  stop  was  scheduled.  But  the  crowd  of  admirers  flung  themselves  on  the 
track,  and  the  train  had  to  be  halted.  The  Swami  was  visibly  moved  and  blessed 
the  multitude. 

The  enthusiasm  of  the  people  reached  its  peak  in  Madras,  where  extensive 
preparations  had  been  made  for  the  Swami’s  reception.  It  was  Madras  that 
had  first  recognized  the  greatness  of  Vivekananda  and  equipped  him  for  the 
journey  to  Chicago.  At  that  time,  when  he  had  first  come  there,  he  had  been, 
in  effect,  only  an  obscure  individual.  He  had  spent  some  two  months  in  an 
unknown  bungalow  at  St.  Thome,  holding  conversations  on  Hinduism.  Yet 
even  then  a  few  educated  young  men  of  keen  foresight  had  predicted  that 
there  was  something  in  the  man,  a  “power"  that  would  lift  him  above  all  others 
and  enable  him  to  be  a  leader  of  men.  These  youths,  who  had  been  ridiculed 
as  “misguided  enthusiasts"  and  “dreamy  revivalists,"  now,  four  years  later, 
had  the  supreme  satisfaction  of  seeing  “our  Swami,"  as  they  loved  to  call  him, 
return  to  them  a  famous  personage  in  both  Europe  and  America. 

The  streets  and  thoroughfares  of  Madras  were  profusely  decorated;  seventeen 
triumphal  arches  were  erected.  The  Swami’s  name  was  on  everybody’s  lips. 
Thousands  jammed  the  railway  station,  and  as  the  train  steamed  in  he  was 
received  with  thundering  shouts  of  applause.  An  elaborate  procession  was 
formed,  and  he  was  taken  to  “Castle  Kernan,"  the  palatial  home  of  Billigiri 
Iyengar,  where  arrangements  had  been  made  for  his  stay  in  the  city. 

On  the  third  day  after  his  arrival  Swami  Vivekananda  was  honoured  in  a 
public  meeting  on  behalf  of  the  people  of  Madras.  As  Victoria  Hall,  chosen 
for  the  purpose,  was  too  small  to  hold  the  large  crowd,  the  people  cried  for 
an  open-air  gathering.  The  Swami  came  out  and  addressed  them  from  the  top 
of  a  coach;  it  was,  as  it  were,  Sri  Krishna,  standing  in  the  chariot,  exhorting 
Arjuna  to  give  up  his  unmanliness  and  measure  up  to  his  Aryan  heritage.  In  a 
brief  speech  he  told  the  people  how  India,  through  her  love  of  God,  had 
expanded  the  limited  love  of  the  family  into  love  of  country  and  of  humanity. 
He  urged  them  to  maintain  their  enthusiasm  and  to  give  him  all  the  help  he 
required  to  do  great  things  for  India. 


Vivekananda 


117 


During  his  short  stay  in  Madras,  Swami  Vivekananda  gave  four  public  lec¬ 
tures,  his  subjects  being,  “My  Plan  of  Campaign,”  “The  Sages  of  India,” 
“Vedanta  in  its  Relation  to  Practical  Life,”  and  “The  Future  of  India.”  In  these 
lectures  he  reminded  the  Indians  of  both  their  greatness  and  their  weakness, 
and  urged  them  to  be  proud  of  their  past  and  hopeful  for  their  future. 

While  speaking  on  “My  Plan  of  Campaign,”  the  Swami  exposed  the  mean¬ 
ness  of  some  of  the  Theosophists,  who  had  tried  their  utmost  to  injure  his 
work  in  America  but  later  claimed  that  they  had  paved  the  way  for  his  success 
in  the  New  World.  He  told  the  audience  that  when,  in  desperation,  he  had 
cabled  to  India  for  money,  the  Theosophists  had  come  to  know  about  it  and 
one  of  them  had  written  to  a  member  of  the  Society  in  India:  “Now  the  devil 
is  going  to  die.  God  bless  us  all!”  But  it  must  be  said  that  there  were  many 
among  the  Theosophists,  especially  in  India,  who  were  his  genuine  well-wishers. 

Swami  Vivekananda  had  hardly  a  moment’s  respite  during  his  nine  days  in 
Madras.  When  asked  by  a  disciple  how  he  found  the  strength  for  such 
incessant  activity,  he  answered,  “Spiritual  work  never  tires  one  in  India.”  But 
he  would  lose  patience  if  asked  about  matters  that  had  no  bearing  on  practical 
life.  One  day  a  pandit  asked  him  to  state  clearly  whether  he  was  a  dualist 
or  a  non-dualist.  The  Swami  said:  “As  long  as  I  have  this  body  I  am  a  dualist, 
but  not  otherwise.  This  incarnation  of  mine  is  to  help  put  an  end  to  useless 
and  mischievous  quarrels,  which  only  distract  the  mind  and  make  men  weary 
of  life,  and  even  turn  them  into  sceptics  and  atheists.” 

Meanwhile  heart-warming  letters  had  been  arriving  from  America  informing 
the  Swami  of  the  progress  of  the  Vedanta  work  in  the  New  World  under 
the  leadership  of  Swami  Saradananda,  and  also  in  appreciation  of  his  own 
achievements.  One  letter  was  signed  by  Lewis  G.  Janes,  President  of  the  Brook¬ 
lyn  Ethical  Association;  C.  C.  Everett,  Dean  of  the  Harvard  Divinity  School; 
William  James  and  Josiah  Royce,  both  professors  of  philosophy  at  Harvard 
University;  Mrs.  Sara  C.  Bull  of  Boston,  and  others.  It  said:  “We  believe  that 
such  expositions  as  have  been  given  by  yourself  and  your  co-labourer,  the  Swami 
Saradananda,  have  more  than  mere  speculative  interest  and  utility — that  they 
are  of  great  ethical  value  in  cementing  the  ties  of  friendship  and  brotherhood 
between  distant  peoples,  and  in  helping  us  to  realize  that  solidarity  of  human 
relationship  and  interests  which  has  been  affirmed  by  all  the  great  religions  of 
the  world.  We  earnestly  hope  that  your  work  in  India  may  be  blessed  in  further 
promoting  this  noble  end,  and  that  you  may  return  to  us  again  with  assurances 
of  fraternal  regard  from  our  distant  brothers  of  the  great  Aryan  family,  and 
the  ripe  wisdom  that  comes  from  reflection  and  added  experience  and  further 
contact  with  the  life  and  thought  of  your  people.” 

Another  letter  from  Detroit,  signed  by  forty-two  of  his  friends,  said  in  part: 
“We  Western  Aryans  have  been  so  long  separated  from  our  Eastern  brothers 
that  we  had  almost  forgotten  our  identity  of  origin,  until  you  came  and  with 
your  beautiful  presence  and  matchless  eloquence  rekindled  within  our  hearts 
the  knowledge  that  we  of  America  and  you  of  India  are  one.” 

Swami  Vivekananda,  after  his  strenuous  work  in  South  India,  needed  rest. 
On  the  advice  of  friends,  he  decided  to  travel  to  Calcutta  by  steamer.  Monday, 
February  15,  was  the  date  of  his  sailing.  Several  devotees  boarded  the  steamer 


118 


Vivekananda 


to  see  him  off,  and  one  of  them,  Professor  Sundarama  Iyer,  asked  the  Swami 
if  his  mission  had  achieved  lasting  good  in  America  and  Europe.  The  Swami 
said:  “Not  much.  I  hope  that  here  and  there  I  have  sown  a  seed  which  in  time 
may  grow  and  benefit  some  at  least.” 

Swami  Vivekananda’s  lectures  delivered  during  his  progress  from  Colombo  to 
Madras  were  inspiring  and  enthusiastic.  He  yearned  to  awaken  the  masses  of 
India  from  the  slumber  of  ages.  He  had  seen  the  dynamic  life  of  the  West; 
he  now  felt  more  deeply  the  personality  of  India,  which  only  needed  his  fiery 
exhortation  to  assert  itself  once  more  among  the  nations  of  the  world.  Again  one 
is  reminded  of  Krishna’s  admonition  to  Arjuna  on  the  battlefield  of  Kurukshetra: 
“In  this  crisis,  O  Arjuna,  whence  comes  such  lowness  of  spirit,  unbecoming  to 
an  Aryan,  dishonourable,  and  an  obstacle  to  the  attaining  of  heaven?  Do  not 
yield  to  unmanliness,  O  Arjuna.  It  does  not  become  you.  Shake  off  this  base 
faint-heartedness  and  arise,  O  scorcher  of  enemies!” 

In  his  famous  lecture  “My  Plan  of  Campaign,”  delivered  in  Madras,  he  called 
upon  the  people  to  assert  their  soul-force: 

My  India,  arise!  Where  is  your  vital  force?  In  your  Immortal  Soul.  Each  nation,  like 
each  individual,  has  one  theme  in  this  life,  which  is  its  centre,  the  principal  note  round 
which  every  other  note  comes  to  form  the  harmony.  If  any  one  nation  attempts  to 
throw  off  its  national  vitality,  the  direction  which  has  become  its  own  through  the 
transmission  of  centuries,  that  nation  dies.  ...  In  one  nation  political  power  is  its 
vitality,  as  in  England.  Artistic  life,  in  another,  and  so  on.  In  India  religious  life  forms 
the  centre,  the  keynote  of  the  whole  music  of  the  national  life.  And  therefore,  if  you 
succeed  in  the  attempt  to  throw  off  your  religion  and  take  up  either  politics  or  society, 
the  result  will  be  that  you  will  become  extinct.  Social  reform  and  politics  have  to  be 
preached  through  the  vitality  of  your  religion.  .  .  .  Every  man  has  to  make  his  own 
choice;  so  has  every  nation.  We  made  our  choice  ages  ago.  And  it  is  the  faith  in  an 
Immortal  Soul.  I  challenge  anyone  to  give  it  up.  How  can  you  change  your  nature? 

He  asked  the  Indians  to  stop  complaining.  Let  them  make  use  of  the  power 
that  lay  in  their  hands.  That  power  was  so  great  that  if  they  only  realized  it 
and  were  worthy  of  it,  they  could  revolutionize  the  world.  India  was  the  Ganges 
of  spirituality.  The  material  conquests  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  races,  far  from  being 
able  to  dam  its  current,  had  helped  it.  England’s  power  had  united  the  nations 
of  the  world;  she  had  opened  paths  across  the  seas  so  that  the  waves  of  the  spirit 
of  India  might  spread  until  they  had  bathed  the  ends  of  the  earth. 

What  was  this  new  faith,  this  word  that  the  world  was  awaiting? 

The  other  great  idea  that  the  world  wants  from  us  today — more  perhaps  the  lower 
classes  than  the  higher,  more  the  uneducated  than  the  educated,  more  the  weak  than 
the  strong — is  that  eternal,  grand  idea  of  the  spiritual  oneness  of  the  whole  universe,  the 
only  Infinite  Reality,  that  exists  in  you  and  in  me  and  in  all,  in  the  self,  in  the  soul.  The 
infinite  oneness  of  the  soul — that  you  and  I  are  not  only  brothers,  but  are  really  one — is 
the  eternal  sanction  of  all  morality.  Europe  wants  it  today  just  as  much  as  our  down¬ 
trodden  races  do,  and  this  great  principle  is  even  now  unconsciously  forming  the  basis 
of  all  the  latest  social  and  political  aspirations  that  are  coming  up  in  England,  in  Ger¬ 
many,  in  France,  and  in  America.21 

21  Extracts  from  the  lecture  “The  Mission  of  the  Vedanta.” 


Vivekananda  119 

What  Swami  Vivekananda  preached  was  the  essence  of  the  non-dualistic 
Vedanta,  the  deepest  and  the  unique  expression  of  India’s  spirit. 

I  heard  once  the  complaint  made  that  I  was  preaching  too  much  of  Advaita,  absolute 
non-dualism,  and  too  little  of  dualism.  Ay,  I  know  what  grandeur,  what  oceans  of  love, 
what  infinite,  ecstatic  blessings  and  joy  there  are  in  dualistic  religion.  I  know  it  all.  But 
this  is  not  the  time  for  us  to  weep,  even  in  joy;  we  have  had  weeping  enough;  no  more 
is  this  the  time  for  us  to  become  soft.  This  softness  has  been  with  us  till  we  have 
become  like  masses  of  cotton.  What  our  country  now  wants  is  muscles  of  iron  and  nerves 
of  steel,  gigantic  will,  which  nothing  can  resist,  which  will  accomplish  their  purpose  in 
any  fashion,  even  if  it  means  going  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  ocean  and  meeting  death 
face  to  face.  That  is  what  we  want,  and  that  can  only  be  created,  established,  and 
strengthened  by  understanding  and  realizing  the  ideal  of  Advaita,  that  ideal  of  the  one¬ 
ness  of  all.  Faith,  faith,  faith  in  ourselves!  ...  If  you  have  faith  in  the  three  hundred 
and  thirty  millions  of  your  mythological  gods,  and  in  all  the  gods  which  foreigners  have 
introduced  into  your  midst,  and  still  have  no  faith  in  yourselves,  there  is  no  salvation 
for  you.  Have  faith  in  yourselves  and  stand  upon  that  faith.  Why  is  it  that  we  three 
hundred  and  thirty  millions  of  people  have  been  ruled  for  the  last  thousand  years  by 
any  and  every  handful  of  foreigners?  Because  they  had  faith  in  themselves  and  we  had 
not.  I  read  in  the  newspapers  how,  when  one  of  our  poor  fellows  is  murdered  or  ill- 
treated  by  an  Englishman,  howls  go  up  all  over  the  country;  I  read  and  I  weep,  and  the 
next  moment  comes  to  my  mind  the  question  of  who  is  responsible  for  it  all.  Not  the 
English;  it  is  we  who  are  responsible  for  all  our  degradation.  Our  aristocratic  ancestors 
went  on  treading  the  common  masses  of  our  country  underfoot  till  they  became  helpless, 
till  under  this  torment  the  poor,  poor  people  nearly  forgot  that  they  were  human  beings. 
They  have  been  compelled  to  be  merely  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water  for  cen¬ 
turies,  so  that  they  are  made  to  believe  that  they  are  born  as  slaves,  born  as  hewers  of 
wood  and  drawers  of  water.22 

He  exhorted  the  leaders  to  cultivate  the  indispensable  virtue  of  feeling  for 
the  people:  “Feel,  therefore,  my  would-be  reformers,  my  would-be  patriots!  Do 
you  feel?  Do  you  feel  that  millions  and  millions  of  the  descendants  of  gods 
and  of  sages  have  become  next-door  neighbours  to  brutes?  Do  you  feel  that 
millions  are  starving  today  and  millions  have  been  starving  for  ages?  Do  you 
feel  that  ignorance  has  come  over  the  land  as  a  dark  cloud?  Does  it  make  you 
restless?  Does  it  make  you  sleepless?  Has  it  made  you  almost  mad?  Are  you 
seized  with  that  one  idea  of  the  misery  of  ruin,  and  have  you  forgotten  all  about 
your  name,  your  fame,  your  wives,  your  children,  your  property,  even  your  own 
bodies?  If  so,  that  is  the  first  step  to  becoming  a  patriot.  For  centuries  people 
have  been  taught  theories  of  degradation.  They  have  been  told  that  they  are 
nothing.  The  masses  have  been  told  all  over  the  world  that  they  are  not  human 
beings.  They  have  been  so  frightened  for  centuries  that  they  have  nearly  become 
animals.  Never  were  they  allowed  to  hear  of  the  Atman.  Let  them  hear  of  the 
Atman— that  even  the  lowest  of  the  low  have  the  Atman  within,  who  never 
dies  and  never  is  born — Him  whom  the  sword  cannot  pierce,  nor  the  fire  burn, 
nor  the  air  dry,  immortal,  without  beginning  or  end,  the  all-pure,  omnipotent, 
and  omnipresent  Atman.”23 

22  Extracts  from  “The  Mission  of  the  Vedanta.” 

23  Extracts  from  “My  Plan  of  Campaign.” 


120 


Vivekananda 


“Ay,  let  every  man  and  woman  and  child,  without  respect  of  caste  or  birth, 
weakness  or  strength,  hear  and  learn  that  behind  the  strong  and  the  weak, 
behind  the  high  and  the  low,  behind  everyone,  there  is  that  Infinite  Soul,  assur¬ 
ing  all  the  infinite  possibility  and  the  infinite  capacity  to  become  great  and 
good.  Let  us  proclaim  to  every  soul:  Arise,  arise,  awake!  Awake  from  this  hyp¬ 
notism  of  weakness.  None  is  really  weak;  the  soul  is  infinite,  omnipotent,  and 
omniscient.  Stand  up,  assert  yourself,  proclaim  the  God  within  you,  do  not 
deny  Him!’'24 

“It  is  a  man-making  religion  that  we  want.  It  is  a  man-making  education  all 
round  that  we  want.  It  is  man-making  theories  that  we  want.  And  here  is  the 
test  of  truth:  Anything  that  makes  you  weak  physically,  intellectually,  and 
spiritually,  reject  as  poison;  there  is  no  life  in  it,  it  cannot  be  true.  Truth  is 
strengthening.  Truth  is  purity,  truth  is  all  knowledge.  Truth  must  be  strength¬ 
ening,  must  be  enlightening,  must  be  invigorating.  Give  up  these  weakening 
mysticisms  and  be  strong.  The  greatest  truths  are  the  simplest  things  in  the 
world,  simple  as  your  own  existence. 

“Therefore  my  plan  is  to  start  institutions  in  India  to  train  our  young  men 
as  preachers  of  the  truths  of  our  scriptures  in  India  and  outside  India.  Men, 
men — these  are  wanted:  everything  else  will  be  ready;  but  strong,  vigorous, 
believing  young  men,  sincere  to  the  backbone,  are  wanted.  A  hundred  such 
and  the  world  becomes  revolutionized.  The  will  is  stronger  than  anything  else. 
Everything  must  go  down  before  the  will,  for  that  comes  from  God:  a  pure 
and  strong  will  is  omnipotent.”25 

“If  the  brahmin  has  more  aptitude  for  learning  on  the  grounds  of  heredity 
than  the  pariah,  spend  no  more  money  on  the  brahmin’s  education,  but  spend 
all  on  the  pariah.  Give  to  the  weak,  for  there  all  the  gift  is  needed.  If  the 
brahmin  is  born  clever,  he  can  educate  himself  without  help.  This  is  justice  and 
reason  as  I  understand  it.”26 

“For  the  next  fifty  years  let  all  other  vain  Gods  disappear  from  our  minds. 
This  is  the  only  God  that  is  awake:  our  own  race — everywhere  His  hands,  every¬ 
where  His  feet,  everywhere  His  ears,  He  covers  everything.  All  other  Gods  are 
sleeping.  Why  should  we  vainly  go  after  them,  when  we  can  worship  the  God 
that  we  see  all  around  us,  the  Virat?  The  first  of  all  worships  is  the  worship 
of  the  Virat,  of  those  all  around  us.  These  are  all  our  Gods — men  and  animals; 
and  the  first  Gods  we  have  to  worship  are  our  own  countrymen.”27 

These  stirring  words  did  not  fall  on  deaf  ears.  The  spirit  of  India  vibrated 
to  the  Swami’s  call.  India  became  aware  of  the  power  of  the  soul — of  God 
sleeping  in  man  and  of  His  illimitable  possibilities.  Ramakrishna  and  Vive¬ 
kananda  were  the  first  awakeners  of  India’s  national  consciousness;  they  were 
India’s  first  nationalist  leaders  in  the  true  sense  of  the  term.  Ramakrishna  was 
the  power  and  Vivekananda  the  voice.  The  movement  for  India’s  liberation 
started  from  Dakshineswar.  The  subsequent  political  leaders  of  the  country, 
consciously  or  unconsciously,  received  their  inspiration  from  Vivekananda’s 

24  Extracts  from  “The  Mission  of  the  Vedanta.” 

25  Extracts  from  “My  Plan  of  Campaign." 

26  From  “The  Mission  of  the  Vedanta." 

27  From  “The  Future  of  India." 


Vivekananda 


121 


message,  and  some  of  them  openly  acknowledged  it.  The  Bengal  revolutionaries 
were  ardent  readers  of  Vivekananda’s  books,  some  of  which  were  frowned  upon 
by  the  British  Government.  The  uplift  of  the  masses,  the  chief  plank  in 
Gandhi’s  platform,  was  Vivekananda’s  legacy. 

Yet  the  militant  Vivekananda  was  not  a  politician.  "Let  no  political  signifi¬ 
cance  ever  be  attached  falsely  to  my  writings  or  sayings.  What  nonsense!” — 
he  had  said  as  early  as  September  1894.  A  year  later  he  wrote:  "I  will  have 
nothing  to  do  with  political  nonsense.  I  do  not  believe  in  politics.  God  and 
Truth  are  the  only  policy  in  the  world.  Everything  else  is  trash.” 

Swami  Vivekananda  longed  for  India’s  political  freedom;  but  he  thought  of  a 
free  India  in  relation  to  her  service  to  humanity.  A  free  India  would  take  her 
rightful  place  in  the  assembly  of  nations  and  make  a  vital  contribution  towards 
bringing  peace  and  goodwill  to  mankind.  His  message  was  both  national  and 
international. 


BACK  TO  BENGAL 

While  Swami  Vivekananda  was  enjoying  the  restful  boat  trip  from  Madras 
to  Calcutta,  a  reception  committee  was  busy  preparing  for  him  a  fitting  welcome 
in  the  metropolis  of  India,  the  city  of  his  birth.  The  steamer  docked  at  Kidder- 
pore,  and  the  Swami  and  his  party  arrived  by  train  in  Calcutta.  The  reception 
was  magnificent,  with  an  enthusiastic  crowd  at  the  railroad  station,  triumphal 
arches,  the  unharnessed  carriage  drawn  by  students,  and  a  huge  procession  with 
music  and  religious  songs.  A  princely  residence  on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges 
was  placed  at  the  Swami’s  disposal. 

On  February  28,  1897,  he  was  given  a  public  reception.  Raja  Benoy  Krishna 
Deb  presided,  and  five  thousand  people  jammed  the  meeting.  As  usual,  the 
Swami  asked  the  people  to  go  back  to  the  perennial  philosophy  of  the  Upan- 
ishads.  He  also  paid  a  touching  tribute  to  Ramakrishna,  "my  teacher,  my  master, 
my  hero,  my  ideal,  my  God  in  life.”  "If  there  has  been  anything  achieved  by 
me,”  he  said  with  deep  feeling,  "by  thoughts  or  words  or  deeds,  if  from  my 
lips  has  ever  fallen  one  word  that  has  ever  helped  anyone  in  the  world,  I  lay  no 
claim  to  it;  it  was  his.  But  if  there  have  been  curses  falling  from  my  lips,  if 
there  has  been  hatred  coming  out  of  me,  it  is  all  mine,  and  not  his.  All  that  has 
been  weak  has  been  mine;  all  that  has  been  life-giving,  strengthening,  pure, 
and  holy  has  been  his  inspiration,  his  words,  and  he  himself.  Yes,  my  friends, 
the  world  has  yet  to  know  that  man.”  A  few  days  after,  he  gave  another  public 
lecture,  on  "Vedanta  in  All  its  Phases.” 

Shortly  after  the  Swami’s  arrival  in  Calcutta  the  anniversary  of  Sri  Rama- 
krishna’s  birth  was  celebrated  at  Dakshineswar.  Accompanied  by  his  brother 
disciples,  the  Swami  joined  the  festival.  He  walked  barefoot  in  the  holy  grounds. 
Deep  emotions  were  stirred  up  as  he  visited  the  temples,  the  Master’s  room, 
the  Panchavati,  and  other  spots  associated  with  the  memory  of  Sri  Ramakrishna. 
The  place  was  a  sea  of  human  heads. 

The  Swami  said  to  Girish,  a  beloved  disciple  of  the  Master,  "Well,  what  a 
difference  between  those  days  and  these!” 

"I  know,”  replied  Girish,  "but  I  have  the  desire  to  see  more.” 

For  a  little  while  the  Swami  spent  his  days  at  the  palatial  house  on  the  river; 


122 


Vivekananda 


nights,  however,  he  spent  with  his  spiritual  brothers  at  the  Alambazar  mon¬ 
astery.  He  had  hardly  any  rest.  People  streamed  in  at  all  times  to  pay  him  their 
respects  or  to  hear  his  exposition  of  Vedanta,  or  just  to  see  him.  There  were 
also  people  who  came  to  argue  with  him  on  scriptural  matters  and  to  test  his 
knowledge. 

But  the  Swami’s  heart  was  with  the  educated,  unmarried  youths  whom  he 
could  train  for  his  future  work.  He  longed  to  infuse  into  their  hearts  some  of 
his  own  burning  enthusiasm.  He  wanted  them  to  become  the  preachers  of  his 
“man-making  religion.”  The  Swami  deplored  the  physical  weakness  of  Indian 
youths,  denounced  their  early  marriage,  and  reproached  them  for  their  lack 
of  faith  in  themselves  and  in  their  national  ideals. 

One  day  a  young  man  complained  to  the  Swami  that  he  could  not  make 
progress  in  spiritual  life.  He  had  worshipped  images,  following  the  advice  of 
one  teacher,  and  had  tried  to  make  his  mind  void  according  to  the  instruction 
of  another,  but  all  had  been  fruitless. 

“Sir,”  the  young  man  said,  “I  sit  still  in  meditation,  shutting  the  door  of 
my  room,  and  keep  my  eyes  closed  as  long  as  I  can,  but  I  do  not  find  peace 
of  mind.  Can  you  show  me  the  way?” 

“My  boy,”  replied  the  Swami  in  a  voice  full  of  loving  sympathy,  “if  you 
take  my  word,  you  will  have  first  of  all  to  open  the  door  of  your  room  and 
look  around,  instead  of  closing  your  eyes.  There  are  hundreds  of  poor  and  help¬ 
less  people  in  your  neighbourhood;  you  have  to  serve  them  to  the  best  of  your 
ability.  You  will  have  to  nurse  and  procure  food  and  medicine  for  the  sick. 
You  will  have  to  feed  those  who  have  nothing  to  eat.  You  will  have  to  teach  the 
ignorant.  My  advice  to  you  is  that  if  you  want  peace  of  mind,  you  shall  have 
to  serve  others  to  the  best  of  your  ability.” 

Another  day  a  well-known  college  professor,  who  was  a  disciple  of  Sri  Rama- 
krishna,  said  to  the  Swami:  “You  are  talking  of  service,  charity,  and  doing  good 
to  the  world;  these,  after  all,  belong  to  the  domain  of  maya.  Vedanta  says  that 
the  goal  of  man  is  the  attainment  of  mukti,  liberation,  through  breaking  the 
chain  of  maya.  What  is  the  use  of  preaching  about  things  which  keep  one’s 
mind  on  mundane  matters?” 

The  Swami  replied:  “Is  not  the  idea  of  mukti  in  the  domain  of  maya?  Does 
not  Vedanta  teach  that  the  Atman  is  ever  free?  Why  should  It,  then,  strive 
for  mukti?” 

He  said  on  another  occasion:  “When  I  used  to  roam  about  all  over  India, 
practising  spiritual  disciplines,  I  passed  day  after  day  in  caves  absorbed  in 
meditation.  Many  a  time  I  decided  to  starve  myself  to  death  because  I  could 
not  attain  mukti.  Now  I  have  no  desire  for  mukti.  I  do  not  care  for  it  as  long 
as  a  single  individual  in  the  universe  remains  in  bondage.” 

Swami  Vivekananda  often  used  to  say  that  different  forms  of  spiritual  dis¬ 
cipline  were  especially  efficacious  for  different  ages.  At  one  period  it  was  the 
practice  of  austerities;  at  another  period,  the  cultivation  of  divine  love;  and 
at  a  third  period,  it  was  philosophical  discrimination  accompanied  by  renun¬ 
ciation.  But  in  modern  times,  he  emphasized,  unselfish  service  of  others, 
karma-yoga,  would  quickly  bring  spiritual  results.  Therefore  he  advocated  the 
discipline  of  selfless  action.  He  particularly  advocated  this  discipline  for  the 


Vivekananda 


123 


Indians  because  they  were  under  the  spell  of  tamas,  inertia.  The  Swami  realized 
that  only  after  cultivating  rajas  would  they  be  able  to  acquire  sattva  and  attain 
liberation.  As  regards  himself,  the  Swami  had  already  known  mukti  through  the 
realization  of  oneness  with  Brahman  in  nirvikalpa  samadhi.  But  by  the  will  of 
God  he  had  brought  himself  down  to  consciousness  of  the  phenomenal  world, 
and  lived  like  a  bodhisattva,  devoting  himself  to  the  welfare  of  humanity. 

Swami  Vivekananda  found  it  most  difficult  to  convert  some  of  his  own 
brother  disciples  to  his  new  conception  of  religion  and  its  discipline  and  method. 
These  brother  disciples  were  individualists,  eager  for  their  personal  salvation. 
They  wanted  to  practise  austerities  and  penances,  enjoy  peaceful  meditation, 
and  lead  a  quiet  life  of  detachment  from  the  world.  To  them  God  was  first,  and 
next  the  world.  At  least  that  was  the  way  they  understood  Sri  Ramakrishna’s 
teachings.  These  young  monks  thought  that  for  one  who  had  taken  the  monas¬ 
tic  vows  the  world  was  maya;  therefore  all  activities,  including  the  charitable 
and  philanthropic,  ultimately  entangled  one  in  worldly  life. 

But  Vivekananda’s  thought  flowed  through  a  different  channel.  Sri  Rama- 
krishna  had  once  admonished  him  to  commune  with  God  with  eyes  open,  that 
is  to  say,  through  the  service  of  the  poor,  the  sick,  the  hungry,  and  the  ignorant. 
During  his  days  of  wandering  the  Swami  had  seen  with  his  own  eyes  the  suffer¬ 
ing  of  the  people  and  had  felt  the  voiceless  appeal  of  India  for  his  help.  In 
America  and  Europe  he  had  witnessed  the  material  prosperity  of  the  people, 
the  dynamic  social  life,  and  the  general  progress  made  through  science,  tech¬ 
nology,  and  organized  action.  Time  and  again  he  remembered  the  words  of 
Ramakrishna:  “Religion  is  not  for  empty  stomachs/’ 

To  his  brother  disciples,  therefore,  he  pointed  out  that  the  idea  of  personal 
liberation  was  unworthy  of  those  who  called  themselves  disciples  of  Rama¬ 
krishna,  an  Incarnation  of  God.  The  very  fact  that  they  had  received  the  grace 
of  a  Saviour  should  have  convinced  them  of  their  sure  salvation.  Their  duty, 
he  emphasized,  was  to  serve  others  as  the  visible  manifestations  of  God.  He 
said  that  he  wanted  to  create  a  new  band  of  monks,  who  would  take  not  only 
the  traditional  vow  of  personal  salvation,  but  also  a  new  vow  of  service  to 
humanity. 

The  brother  disciples,  who  respected  the  superior  spirituality  of  Vivekananda 
and  bore  him  great  love  as  the  one  especially  chosen  by  the  Master  to  carry 
on  his  work,  obeyed  him  without  always  agreeing  with  him  wholeheartedly. 
Thus  at  his  behest  Swami  Ramakrishnananda — who  had  been  the  keeper  of 
Sri  Ramakrishna’s  shrine  for  twelve  long  years  after  the  passing  away  of  the 
Master,  regarding  his  worship  as  the  supreme  spiritual  discipline,  and  had  not 
been  absent  even  for  a  single  day  from  the  monasteries  at  Baranagore  and  Alam- 
bazar — left  for  Madras  to  found  a  centre  for  the  propagation  of  Vedanta  in 
South  India.  Swami  Akhandananda  went  to  Murshidabad  to  carry  on  relief  work 
among  the  famine-stricken  people  there.  Swamis  Abhedananda  and  Saradananda 
had  already  gone  to  America. 

As  for  himself,  Swami  Vivekananda  was  constantly  talking  to  people,  instruct¬ 
ing  them  in  the  Upanishads,  and  enjoining  them  to  cultivate  the  inner  strength 
that  comes  from  the  knowledge  of  God  residing  in  all  human  hearts.  The  strain 
of  work  and  the  heat  of  the  plains  soon  told  upon  his  health.  At  the  advice 


Vivekananda 


124 

of  physicians  he  went  for  a  short  change  to  Darjeeling,  in  the  Himalayas,  and 
felt  somewhat  refreshed.  Returning  to  Calcutta  he  again  devoted  himself  to  the 
work  of  teaching. 

Several  young  men,  inspired  by  the  Swami's  fiery  words,  joined  the  Order. 
Four  others,  who  had  been  practising  disciplines  in  the  monastery  under  the 
guidance  of  the  older  Swamis  while  Vivekananda  was  abroad,  were  now  eager 
to  receive  the  monastic  initiation  formally  from  their  great  leader.  His  brother 
disciples  expressed  hesitation  about  one  of  them,  because  of  some  incidents 
of  his  past  life. 

This  aroused  Swami  Vivekananda’s  emotion.  “What  is  this?”  he  said.  “If 
we  shrink  from  sinners,  who  else  will  save  them?  Besides,  the  very  fact  that 
someone  has  taken  refuge  at  the  monastery,  in  his  desire  to  lead  a  better  life, 
shows  that  his  intentions  are  good,  and  we  must  help  him.  Suppose  a  man 
is  bad  and  perverted;  if  you  cannot  change  his  character,  why  then  have 
you  put  on  the  ochre  robe  of  a  monk?  Why  have  you  assumed  the  role  of 
teachers?”  All  four  received  their  monastic  initiation. 

On  the  day  previous  to  this  sacred  ceremony  the  Swami  spoke  to  them  only 
about  the  glories  of  renunciation  and  service.  He  said:  “Remember,  for  the 
salvation  of  his  soul  and  for  the  good  and  happiness  of  many,  a  sannyasin  is 
born  in  the  world.  To  sacrifice  his  own  life  for  others,  to  alleviate  the  misery 
of  millions  rending  the  air  with  their  cries,  to  wipe  away  tears  from  the  eyes 
of  widows,  to  console  the  hearts  of  bereaved  mothers,  to  provide  the  ignorant 
and  depressed  masses  with  ways  and  means  for  the  struggle  for  existence  and 
make  them  stand  on  their  own  feet,  to  broadcast  the  teachings  of  the  scriptures 
to  one  and  all,  without  distinction,  for  their  spiritual  and  material  welfare,  to 
rouse  the  sleeping  lion  of  Brahman  in  the  hearts  of  all  beings  by  the  knowledge 
of  Vedanta — a  sannyasin  is  born  in  the  world.”  Turning  to  his  brother  disciples 
the  Swami  said:  “Remember,  it  is  for  the  consummation  of  this  purpose  in  life 
that  we  have  taken  birth,  and  we  shall  lay  down  our  lives  for  it.  Arise  and  awake, 
arouse  and  awaken  others,  fulfil  your  mission  in  life,  and  you  will  reach  the 
highest  goal.”  Then  addressing  the  aspirants  for  the  monastic  life  he  said:  “You 
must  renounce  everything.  You  must  not  seek  comfort  or  pleasure  for  yourself. 
You  must  look  upon  gold  and  objects  of  lust  as  poison,  name  and  fame  as  the 
vilest  filth,  worldly  glory  as  a  terrible  hell,  pride  of  birth  or  of  social  position 
as  ‘sinful  as  drinking  spirituous  liquor/  In  order  to  be  teachers  of  your  fellow 
men,  and  for  the  good  of  the  world,  you  will  have  to  attain  freedom  through 
the  knowledge  of  the  Self.” 

From  the  following  incident  one  can  learn  the  depths  of  the  S  warm's  com¬ 
passion.  Many  inmates  of  the  math  thought  that  he  was  not  very  discriminating 
in  the  choice  of  his  disciples.  Almost  anyone  could  obtain  spiritual  initiation 
from  him  after  a  little  supplication,  and  some  of  them  were  found  later  to 
indulge  in  wicked  actions.  One  of  his  own  monastic  disciples,  Swami  Nirmal- 
ananda,  spoke  to  him  about  his  lack  of  proper  judgement  and  his  inability  to 
understand  human  nature.  The  Swami’s  face  became  red  with  emotion.  He 
exclaimed:  “What  did  you  say?  You  think  that  I  do  not  understand  human 
nature?  About  these  unfortunate  people  I  know  not  only  all  they  have  done 
in  their  present  lives,  but  also  what  they  did  in  their  previous  ones.  I  am  fully 


Vivekananda 


125 


aware  of  what  they  will  do  in  the  future.  Then  why  do  I  show  kindness  to  them? 
These  hapless  people  have  knocked  at  many  doors  for  peace  of  mind  and  a 
word  of  encouragement,  but  everywhere  have  been  repulsed.  If  I  turn  them 
down  they  will  have  no  place  to  go.” 

Another  incident  indicating  the  tender  and  compassionate  heart  of  Swami 
Vivekananda  may  be  mentioned  here.  One  day  he  was  engaged  in  teaching 
a  disciple  the  Vedas,  with  the  abstruse  commentary  of  Sayanacharya,  when 
Girish  Chandra  Ghosh,  the  great  playwright  of  Bengal  and  an  intimate  disciple 
of  Sri  Ramakrishna,  arrived.  By  way  of  teasing  him,  the  Swami  said,  addressing 
him  by  his  familiar  name:  “Well,  G.  C.,  you  have  spent  your  whole  life  with 
Krishna  and  Vishnu.28  You  are  quite  innocent  of  the  Vedas  and  other  scrip¬ 
tures.” 

Girish  Chandra  admitted  his  ignorance  of  the  scriptures  and  said,  “Hail  Sri 
Ramakrishna,  the  very  embodiment  of  the  Vedas!” 

An  adept  in  the  knowledge  of  human  nature,  Girish  was  well  aware  that 
Swami  Vivekananda,  in  spite  of  his  preaching  the  austere  philosophy  of  Vedanta, 
had  a  heart  that  was  tender  in  the  extreme.  He  wanted  to  reveal  that  side  of  the 
Swami’s  nature  before  the  disciple,  and  began  to  paint,  in  his  usual  poetic 
language,  a  heart-rending  picture  of  the  afflictions  of  the  Indian  people — the 
starvation  of  the  masses,  the  humiliation  of  Hindu  women,  the  ill  health  and 
general  suffering  of  the  people  everywhere.  Suddenly,  addressing  the  Swami,  he 
said,  “Now  please  tell  me,  do  your  Vedas  teach  us  how  to  remedy  this  state 
of  affairs?” 

As  the  Swami  listened  to  his  friend’s  words,  he  could  hardly  suppress  his 
emotion.  At  last  it  broke  all  bounds  and  he  burst  into  tears. 

Drawing  the  attention  of  the  Swami’s  disciple  to  the  great  leader,  Girish 
Chandra  said:  “Perhaps  you  have  always  admired  your  teacher’s  intellect.  Now 
you  see  his  great  heart.” 

On  May  1,  1897,  Swami  Vivekananda  called  a  meeting  of  the  monastic 
and  lay  devotees  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  at  the  house  of  the  Master’s  intimate  dis¬ 
ciple  Balaram  Bose,  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  his  work  on  an  organized 
basis.  He  told  them  that  by  contrasting  Hindu  society  with  American  society, 
he  was  convinced  that  lack  of  an  organizing  spirit  was  one  of  the  great  short¬ 
comings  of  the  Hindu  character.  Much  of  the  intelligence  and  energy  of  the 
Hindus  was  being  expended  without  producing  any  fruitful  result.  He  also 
recalled  how  Buddhism  had  spread  both  in  India  and  abroad  through  Buddhist 
organizations.  Therefore  he  asked  the  co-operation  of  the  monastic  and  house¬ 
holder  disciples  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  in  order  to  organize  the  educational,  philan¬ 
thropic,  and  religious  activities  which  he  had  already  inaugurated,  but  which 
had  hitherto  been  carried  out  in  an  unsystematic  way.  Further,  the  Swami 
declared  that  in  a  country  like  India,  in  its  then  current  state  of  development, 
it  would  not  be  wise  to  form  an  organization  on  a  democratic  basis,  where  each 
member  had  an  equal  voice  and  decisions  were  made  according  to  the  vote 
of  the  majority.  Democratic  principles  could  be  followed  later,  when,  with  the 
spread  of  education,  people  would  learn  to  sacrifice  individual  interests  and 

28  An  allusion  to  the  dramas  written  by  Girish  Chandra  Ghosh,  in  which  Krishna, 
Vishnu,  and  other  characters  of  Hindu  mythology  play  prominent  parts. 


126 


Vivekananda 


personal  prejudices  for  the  public  weal.  Therefore,  said  the  Swami,  the  organ¬ 
ization  for  the  time  being  should  be  under  the  leadership  of  a  “dictator,”  whose 
authority  everybody  must  obey.  In  the  fullness  of  time,  it  would  come  to  be 
guided  by  the  opinion  and  consent  of  others.  Moreover,  he  himself  was  only 
acting  in  the  capacity  of  a  servant  of  the  common  Master,  as  were  they  all.29 

Swami  Vivekananda  proposed  to  the  members  present  that  the  Association 
should  “bear  the  name  of  him  in  whose  name  we  have  become  sannyasins, 
taking  whom  as  your  ideal  you  are  leading  the  life  of  householders,  and  whose 
holy  name,  influence,  and  teachings  have,  within  twelve  years  of  his  passing 
away,  spread  in  such  an  unthought-of  way  both  in  the  East  and  in  the  West.” 
All  the  members  enthusiastically  approved  of  the  Swami’s  proposal,  and  the 
Ramakrishna  Mission  Association  came  into  existence. 

The  aim  of  the  Association  was  to  spread  the  truths  that  Ramakrishna,  for 
the  good  of  humanity,  had  preached  and  taught  through  the  example  of  his 
own  life,  and  to  help  others  to  put  them  into  practice  for  their  physical,  mental, 
and  spiritual  advancement. 

The  duty  of  the  Association  was  to  direct,  in  the  right  spirit,  the  activities 
of  the  movement  inaugurated  by  Sri  Ramakrishna  for  the  establishment  of  fel¬ 
lowship  among  the  followers  of  different  religions,  knowing  them  all  to  be  so 
many  forms  of  one  undying  Eternal  Religion. 

Its  methods  of  action  were  to  be:  (a)  to  train  men  so  as  to  make  them 
competent  to  teach  such  knowledge  and  sciences  as  are  conducive  to  the  material 
and  spiritual  welfare  of  the  masses;  (b)  to  promote  and  encourage  arts  and 
industries;  (c)  to  introduce  and  spread  among  the  people  in  general  Vedantic 
and  other  ideas  as  elucidated  in  the  life  of  Sri  Ramakrishna. 

The  Ramakrishna  Mission  Association  was  to  have  two  departments  of 
action:  Indian  and  foreign.  The  former,  through  retreats  and  monasteries  estab¬ 
lished  in  different  parts  of  India,  would  train  such  monks  and  householders  as 
might  be  willing  to  devote  their  lives  to  the  teaching  of  others.  The  latter  would 
send  trained  members  of  the  Order  to  countries  outside  India  to  start  centres 
there  for  the  preaching  of  Vedanta  in  order  to  bring  about  a  closer  relationship 
and  better  understanding  between  India  and  foreign  countries. 

The  aims  and  ideals  of  the  Ramakrishna  Mission  Association,  being  purely 
spiritual  and  humanitarian,  were  to  have  no  connexion  with  politics. 

Swami  Vivekananda  must  have  felt  a  great  inner  satisfaction  after  the  estab- 

29  A  touching  incident  that  happened  shortly  afterwards  and  expresses  the  complete 
self-effacement  of  the  Swami,  may  be  narrated  here.  He  handed  over  to  Swami  Brahma- 
nanda,  the  newly  appointed  President  of  the  Ramakrishna  Mission  Association,  all  the 
money  he  had  brought  from  America  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on  his  Indian  activities, 
with  the  request  that  “only  the  kids  should  be  eaten  and  the  mother  goat  be  spared,” 
meaning  that  the  Association  should  spend  only  the  interest  and  not  touch  the  capital. 
Thus  he  himself  was  left  without  any  personal  income.  A  few  minutes  later  he  said  that 
he  would  like  to  go  to  Calcutta  and  requested  one  of  his  disciples  to  ask  Swami 
Brahmananda  for  a  few  pennies  for  the  ferry-boat  across  the  Ganges.  Swami  Brahmananda 
felt  embarrassed  and  told  him  that  the  whole  money  belonged  to  him  and  that  he  must 
not  ask  for  it  in  that  way.  But  Swami  Vivekananda  insisted  on  being  counted  as  any 
other  member  of  the  monastery. 


Vivekananda 


127 


lishment  of  the  Association.  His  vision  of  employing  religion,  through  head, 
heart,  and  hands,  for  the  welfare  of  man  was  realized.  He  found  no  essential 
conflict  among  science,  religion,  art,  and  industry.  All  could  be  used  for  the 
worship  of  God.  God  could  be  served  as  well  through  His  diverse  manifestations 
as  through  the  contemplation  of  His  non-dual  aspect.  Further,  as  the  great 
heart  of  Ramakrishna  had  embraced  all  of  mankind  with  its  love,  so  also  the 
Ramakrishna  Mission  was  pledged  to  promote  brotherhood  among  different 
faiths,  since  their  harmony  constituted  the  Eternal  Religion. 

Swami  Vivekananda,  the  General  President,  made  Brahmananda  and  Yoga- 
nanda  the  President  and  the  Vice-president  of  the  Calcutta  centre.  Weekly 
meetings  were  organized  at  Balaram’s  house  to  discuss  the  Upanishads,  the 
Bhagavad  Gita,  the  Vedanta  scriptures,  and  religious  subjects  in  general.30 

Even  now  Swami  Vivekananda  could  not  completely  convince  some  of  his 
brother  disciples  about  his  new  conception  of  religion,  namely,  the  worship  of 
God  through  the  service  of  man.  They  had  heard  Sri  Ramakrishna  speak  time 
and  again  against  preaching,  excessive  study  of  the  scriptures,  and  charitable 
activities,  and  exhort  aspirants  to  intensify  their  love  of  God  through  prayer 
and  meditation  in  solitude.  Therefore  they  regarded  Vivekananda’s  activities 
in  the  West  as  out  of  harmony  with  the  Master’s  teachings.  One  of  them  said 
bluntly  to  the  Swami,  “You  did  not  preach  our  Master  in  America;  you  only 
preached  yourself.”  The  Swami  retorted  with  equal  bluntncss,  “Let  people 
understand  me  first;  then  they  will  understand  Sri  Ramakrishna.” 

On  one  occasion  Swami  Vivekananda  felt  that  some  of  these  brother  dis¬ 
ciples  wanted  to  create  a  narrow  sect  in  the  name  of  Ramakrishna  and  turn 
the  Ramakrishna  Math  into  a  cult  of  the  Temple,  where  the  religious  activi¬ 
ties  would  centre  around  devotional  music,  worship,  and  prayer  alone.  His 
words  burst  upon  them  like  a  bomb-shell.  He  asked  them  how  they  knew 
that  his  ideas  were  not  in  keeping  with  those  of  Sri  Ramakrishna.  “Do  you 
want,”  he  said,  “to  shut  Sri  Ramakrishna,  the  embodiment  of  infinite  ideas, 
within  your  own  limits?  I  shall  break  these  limits  and  scatter  his  ideas  broadcast 
all  over  the  world.  He  never  enjoined  me  to  introduce  his  worship  and  the 
like.” 

30  In  1899  Swami  Vivekananda  established  the  Belur  Math,  the  present  Headquarters 
of  the  Ramakrishna  Order,  and  turned  it  over  to  a  Board  of  Trustees  drawn  from  the 
monastic  members  of  the  Ramakrishna  Order;  the  main  purpose  of  the  Math  was  to 
train  monks  in  spiritual  practice  and  to  serve  humanity  in  all  possible  ways.  It  was,  how¬ 
ever,  restricted  in  its  public  activities.  With  the  establishment  of  the  Belur  Math,  the 
Ramakrishna  Mission  Association  ceased  to  function  as  an  independent  organization. 
Soon  the  need  was  felt  to  conduct  extensive  philanthropic,  charitable,  educational,  and 
missionary  work.  Therefore  a  separate  organization,  called  the  Ramakrishna  Mission, 
was  set  up  to  carry  on  these  activities,  and  a  legal  status  was  given  to  it  in  1909.  Its 
membership  was  open  to  monks  and  laymen.  But  the  management  of  the  Ramakrishna 
Mission  was  vested  in  a  Governing  Body,  which,  for  the  time  being,  consisted  of  the 
Trustees  of  the  Belur  Math.  Both  the  Ramakrishna  Math  at  Belur,  also  called  the  Belur 
Math,  and  the  Ramakrishna  Mission  now  have  branches  all  over  India.  The  members 
of  the  Math  devote  themselves  mainly  to  the  spiritual  practices  of  study,  prayer,  worship, 
and  meditation,  whereas  the  members  of  the  Mission  carry  on  public  activities  in  various 
fields. 


128  Vivekananda 

Had  it  not  been  demonstrated  to  Vivekananda  time  and  again  that  Sri 
Ramakrishna  was  behind  him  in  all  his  actions?  He  knew  that  through  the 
Master’s  grace  alone  he  had  come  out  triumphant  from  all  ordeals,  whether 
in  the  wilderness  of  India  or  in  the  busy  streets  of  Chicago. 

“Sri  Ramakrishna/’  the  Swami  continued,  “is  far  greater  than  the  disciples 
understand  him  to  be.  He  is  the  embodiment  of  infinite  spiritual  ideas  capable 
of  development  in  infinite  ways.  .  .  .  One  glance  of  his  gracious  eyes  can  create 
a  hundred  thousand  Vivekanandas  at  this  instant.  If  he  chooses  now,  instead, 
to  work  through  me,  making  me  his  instrument,  I  can  only  bow  to  his  will.” 

Vivekananda  took  great  care  lest  sentimentalism  and  narrowness  in  one  form 
or  another  should  creep  in,  for  he  detested  these  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart. 

But  things  came  to  a  climax  one  day  at  Balaram’s  house  in  Calcutta,  when 
Swami  Jogananda,  a  brother  disciple  whom  Sri  Ramakrishna  had  pointed  out 
as  belonging  to  his  “inner  circle”  of  devotees,  said  that  the  Master  had  empha¬ 
sized  bhakti  alone  for  spiritual  seekers  and  that  philanthropic  activities,  organ¬ 
izations,  homes  of  service  for  the  public  good,  and  patriotic  work  were  the 
Swami’s  own  peculiar  ideas,  the  result  of  his  Western  education  and  travel 
in  Europe  and  America. 

The  Swami  at  first  retorted  to  his  brother  with  a  sort  of  rough  humour.  He 
said:  “What  do  you  know?  You  are  an  ignorant  man.  .  .  .  What  do  you  under¬ 
stand  of  religion?  You  are  only  good  at  praying  with  folded  hands:  ‘O  Lord!  how 
beautiful  is  Your  nose!  How  sweet  are  Your  eyes!’  and  all  such  nonsense.  .  .  .  And 
you  think  your  salvation  is  secured  and  Sri  Ramakrishna  will  come  at  the 
final  hour  and  take  you  by  the  hand  to  the  highest  heaven!  Study,  public 
preaching,  and  doing  humanitarian  works  are,  according  to  you,  maya,  because 
he  said  to  someone,  ‘Seek  and  find  God  first;  doing  good  to  the  world  is  a  pre¬ 
sumption!’  As  if  God  is  such  an  easy  thing  to  be  achieved!  As  if  He  is  such 
a  fool  as  to  make  Himself  a  plaything  in  the  hands  of  an  imbecile! 

“You  think  you  have  understood  Sri  Ramakrishna  better  than  myself!  You 
think  jnana  is  dry  knowledge  to  be  attained  by  a  desert  path,  killing  out  the 
tenderest  faculties  of  the  heart!  Your  bhakti  is  sentimental  nonsense  which 
makes  one  impotent.  You  want  to  preach  Sri  Ramakrishna  as  you  have  under¬ 
stood  him,  which  is  mighty  little!  Hands  off!  Who  cares  for  your  Ramakrishna? 
Who  cares  for  your  bhakti  and  mukti?  Who  cares  what  your  scriptures  say? 
I  will  go  into  a  thousand  hells  cheerfully  if  I  can  rouse  my  countrymen, 
immersed  in  tamas,  to  stand  on  their  own  feet  and  be  men  inspired  with  the 
spirit  of  karma-yoga.  I  am  not  a  follower  of  Ramakrishna  or  anyone,  but  of 
him  only  who  serves  and  helps  others  without  caring  for  his  own  bhakti  and 
mukti!” 

The  Swami’s  voice  was  choked  with  emotion,  his  body  shook,  and  his  eyes 
flashed  fire.  Quickly  he  went  to  the  next  room.  A  few  moments  later  some  of  his 
brother  disciples  entered  the  room  and  found  him  absorbed  in  meditation,  tears 
flowing  from  his  half-closed  eyes.  After  nearly  an  hour  the  Swami  got  up, 
washed  his  face,  and  joined  his  spiritual  brothers  in  the  drawing-room.  His  fea¬ 
tures  still  showed  traces  of  the  violent  storm  through  which  he  had  just 
passed;  but  he  had  recovered  his  calmness.  He  said  to  them  softly: 

“When  a  man  attains  bhakti,  his  heart  and  nerves  become  so  soft  and  delicate 


VlVEKANANDA  AS  HlNDU  TEACHER 


Brahmananda 


Premananda 


Saradananda 


Advaitananda 


Adbhutananda 


Shivananda 


Ramakrishnananda 


Turiyananda 


1  RIGUNATITANANDA 


VlJNANANANDA 


Abhedananda 


Sri  Ramakrishna  Monastery  at  Belur 
( Vivekananda’s  room  is  at  left  front  of  second  storey.) 


Vivekananda 


129 


that  he  cannot  bear  even  the  touch  of  a  flower!  ...  I  cannot  think  or  talk 
of  Sri  Ramakrishna  long  without  being  overwhelmed.  So  I  am  always  trying 
to  bind  myself  with  the  iron  chains  of  jnana,  for  still  my  work  for  my  mother¬ 
land  is  unfinished  and  my  message  to  the  world  not  fully  delivered.  So  as  soon 
as  I  find  that  those  feelings  of  bhakti  are  trying  to  come  up  and  sweep  me  off 
my  feet,  I  give  a  hard  knock  to  them  and  make  myself  firm  and  adamant  by 
bringing  up  austere  jnana.  Oh,  I  have  work  to  do!  I  am  a  slave  of  Ramakrishna, 
who  left  his  work  to  be  done  by  me  and  will  not  give  me  rest  till  I  have  finished 
it.  And  oh,  how  shall  I  speak  of  him?  Oh,  his  love  for  me!” 

He  was  again  about  to  enter  into  an  ecstatic  mood,  when  Swami  Jogananda 
and  the  others  changed  the  conversation,  took  him  on  the  roof  for  a  stroll,  and 
tried  to  divert  his  mind  by  small  talk.  They  felt  that  Vivekananda’s  inmost  soul 
had  been  aroused,  and  they  remembered  the  Master's  saying  that  the  day  Naren 
knew  who  he  was,  he  would  not  live  in  this  body.  So  from  that  day  the  brother 
disciples  did  not  again  criticize  the  Swami’s  method,  knowing  fully  well  that  the 
Master  alone  was  working  through  him. 

From  this  incident  one  sees  how  Vivekananda,  in  his  inmost  heart,  relished 
bhakti,  the  love  of  God.  But  in  his  public  utterances  he  urged  the  Indians  to 
keep  their  emotionalism  under  control;  he  emphasized  the  study  of  Vedanta, 
because  he  saw  in  it  a  sovereign  tonic  to  revivify  them.  He  further  prescribed 
for  his  countrymen  both  manual  and  spiritual  work,  scientific  research,  and 
service  to  men.  Vivekananda’s  mission  was  to  infuse  energy  and  faith  into  a 
nation  of  “dyspeptics”  held  under  the  spell  of  their  own  sentimentality.  He 
wished  in  all  fields  of  activity  to  awaken  that  austere  elevation  of  spirit  which 
arouses  heroism. 

As  with  his  Master,  the  natural  tendency  of  Vivekananda’s  mind  was  to  be 
absorbed  in  contemplation  of  the  Absolute.  Again,  like  Sri  Ramakrishna,  he 
had  to  bring  down  his  mind  forcibly  to  the  consciousness  of  the  world  in  order 
to  render  service  to  men.  Thus  he  kept  a  balance  between  the  burning  love  of 
the  Absolute  and  the  irresistible  appeal  of  suffering  humanity.  And  what  makes 
Swami  Vivekananda  the  patriot  saint  of  modern  India  and  at  the  same  time 
endears  him  so  much  to  the  West  is  that  at  the  times  when  he  had  to  make 
a  choice  between  the  two,  it  was  always  the  appeal  of  suffering  humanity  that 
won  the  day.  He  cheerfully  sacrificed  the  bliss  of  samadhi  to  the  amelioration 
of  the  suffering  of  men.  The  Swami’s  spirit  acted  like  a  contagion  upon  his 
brother  disciples.  One  of  them,  Akhandananda,  as  stated  before,  fed  and  nursed 
the  sufferers  from  famine  at  Murshidabad,  in  Bengal;  another,  Trigunatita,  in 
1897  opened  a  famine-relief  centre  at  Dinajpur.  Other  centres  were  established 
at  Deoghar,  Dakshineswar,  and  Calcutta. 

Swami  Vivekananda  was  overjoyed  to  see  the  happy  beginning  of  his  work 
in  India.  To  Mary  Hale  he  wrote  on  July  9,  1897: 

Only  one  idea  was  burning  in  my  brain — to  start  the  machine  for  elevating  the  Indian 
masses,  and  that  I  have  succeeded  in  doing  to  a  certain  extent. 

It  would  have  made  your  heart  glad  to  see  how  my  boys  are  working  in  the  midst  of 
famine  and  disease  and  misery — nursing  by  the  mat-bed  of  the  cholera-stricken  pariah 
and  feeding  the  starving  chandala,  and  the  Lord  sends  help  to  me,  to  them,  to  all.  .  .  . 
He  is  with  me,  the  Beloved,  and  He  was  when  I  was  in  America,  in  England,  when  I 


130 


Vivekananda 


was  roaming  about  unknown  from  place  to  place  in  India.  What  do  I  care  about  what 
they  say?31  The  babies — they  do  not  know  any  better.  What?  I,  who  have  realized  the 
Spirit,  and  the  vanity  of  all  earthly  nonsense,  to  be  swerved  from  my  path  by  babies' 
prattle?  Do  I  look  like  that?  ...  I  feel  my  task  is  done — at  most  three  or  four  years 
more  of  life  are  left.  I  have  lost  all  wish  for  my  salvation.  I  never  wanted  earthly  enjoy¬ 
ments.  I  must  see  my  machine  in  strong  working  order,  and  then,  knowing  for  sure  that 
I  have  put  in  a  lever  for  the  good  of  humanity,  in  India  at  least,  which  no  power  can 
drive  back,  I  will  sleep  without  caring  what  will  be  next. 

And  may  I  be  born  again  and  again,  and  suffer  thousands  of  miseries,  so  that  I  may 
worship  the  only  God  that  exists,  the  only  God  I  believe  in,  the  sum  total  of  all  souls. 
And  above  all,  my  God  the  wicked,  my  God  the  miserable,  my  God  the  poor  of  all  races, 
of  all  species,  is  the  especial  object  of  my  worship. 

IN  NORTHERN  INDIA 

From  May  1897  to  the  end  of  that  year,  the  Swami  travelled  and  lectured 
extensively  in  Northern  India.  The  physicians  had  advised  him  to  go  as  soon 
as  possible  to  Almora,  where  the  air  was  dry  and  cool,  and  he  had  been  invited 
by  prominent  people  in  Northern  India  to  give  discourses  on  Hinduism.  Accom¬ 
panied  by  some  of  his  brother  disciples  and  his  own  disciples,  he  left  Calcutta, 
and  he  was  joined  later  by  the  Seviers,  Miss  Muller,  and  Goodwin. 

In  Lucknow  he  was  given  a  cordial  welcome.  The  sight  of  the  Himalayas  in 
Almora  brought  him  inner  peace  and  filled  his  mind  with  the  spirit  of  detach¬ 
ment  and  exaltation  of  which  these  great  mountains  are  the  symbol.  But  his 
peace  was  disturbed  for  a  moment  when  he  received  letters  from  American  dis¬ 
ciples  about  the  malicious  reports  against  his  character  spread  by  Christian 
missionaries,  including  Dr.  Barrows,  who  had  been  the  President  of  the  Parlia¬ 
ment  of  Religions  in  Chicago.  Evidently  they  had  become  jealous  of  the  Swami’s 
popularity  in  India.  Dr.  Barrows  told  the  Americans  that  the  report  of  the 
Swami’s  reception  in  India  was  greatly  exaggerated.  He  accused  the  Swami  of 
being  a  liar  and  remarked:  “I  could  never  tell  whether  to  take  him  seriously 
or  not.  He  struck  me  as  being  a  Hindu  Mark  Twain.  He  is  a  man  of  genius 
and  has  some  following,  though  only  temporary.” 

The  Swami  was  grieved.  At  his  request  the  people  of  Madras  had  given  Dr. 
Barrows  a  big  reception,  but  the  missionary,  lacking  religious  universalism,  had 
not  made  much  of  an  impression. 

In  a  mood  of  weariness  the  Swami  wrote  to  a  friend  on  June  3,  1897: 

As  for  myself,  I  am  quite  content.  I  have  roused  a  good  many  of  our  people,  and  that 
was  all  I  wanted.  Let  things  have  their  course  and  karma  its  sway.  I  have  no  bonds  here 
below.  I  have  seen  life,  and  it  is  all  self — life  is  for  self,  love  is  for  self,  honour  for  self, 
everything  for  self.  I  look  back  and  scarcely  find  any  action  I  have  done  for  self — even 
my  wicked  deeds  were  not  for  self.  So  I  am  content — not  that  I  feel  I  have  done  any¬ 
thing  especially  good  or  great,  but  the  world  is  so  little,  life  so  mean  a  thing,  existence  so, 
so  servile,  that  I  wonder  and  smile  that  human  beings,  rational  souls,  should  be  running 
after  this  self — so  mean  and  detestable  a  prize. 

This  is  the  truth.  We  are  caught  in  a  trap,  and  the  sooner  one  gets  out  the  better  for 
one.  I  have  seen  the  truth — let  the  body  float  up  or  down,  who  cares?  .  .  . 

31  Referring  to  some  scurrilous  remarks  about  Swami  Vivekananda  by  certain  American 
missionaries. 


Vivekananda  131 

I  was  born  for  the  life  of  a  scholar — retired,  quiet,  poring  over  my  books.  But  the 
Mother  dispensed  otherwise.  Yet  the  tendency  is  there. 

In  Almora  the  Swami’s  health  improved  greatly.  On  May  29  he  wrote  to  a 
friend:  “I  began  to  take  a  lot  of  exercise  on  horseback,  both  morning  and 
evening.  Since  then  I  have  been  very  much  better  indeed.  ...  I  really  began 
to  feel  that  it  was  a  pleasure  to  have  a  body.  Every  movement  made  me  conscious 
of  strength — every  movement  of  the  muscles  was  pleasurable.  ...  You  ought  to 
see  me,  Doctor,  when  I  sit  meditating  in  front  of  the  beautiful  snow-peaks 
and  repeat  from  the  Upanishads:  ‘He  has  neither  disease,  nor  decay,  nor  death; 
for  verily,  he  has  obtained  a  body  full  of  the  fire  of  yoga/  ” 

He  was  delighted  to  get  the  report  that  his  disciples  and  spiritual  brothers 
were  plunging  heart  and  soul  into  various  philanthropic  and  missionary  activities. 

From  Almora  he  went  on  a  whirlwind  tour  of  the  Punjab  and  Kashmir, 
sowing  everywhere  the  seeds  of  rejuvenated  Hinduism.  In  Bareilly  he  encouraged 
the  students  to  organize  themselves  to  carry  on  the  work  of  practical  Vedanta.  In 
Ambala  he  was  happy  to  see  his  beloved  disciples  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sevier.  After 
spending  a  few  days  in  Amritsar,  Dharamsala,  and  Murree,  he  went  to  Kashmir. 

In  Jammu  the  Swami  had  a  long  interview  with  the  Maharaja  and  discussed 
with  him  the  possibility  of  founding  in  Kashmir  a  monastery  for  giving  young 
people  training  in  non-dualism.  In  the  course  of  the  conversation  he  sadly 
remarked  how  the  present-day  Hindus  had  deviated  from  the  ideals  of  their 
forefathers,  and  how  people  were  clinging  to  various  superstitions  in  the  name 
of  religion.  He  said  that  in  olden  days  people  were  not  outcasted  even  when 
they  committed  such  real  sins  as  adultery,  and  the  like;  whereas  nowadays  one 
became  Untouchable  simply  by  violating  the  rules  about  food. 

On  the  same  topic  he  said  a  few  months  later,  at  Khetri:  “The  people  are 
neither  Hindus  nor  Vedantins — they  are  merely  ‘don’t  touchists’;  the  kitchen 
is  their  temple  and  cooking-pots  are  their  objects  of  worship.  This  state  of 
things  must  go.  The  sooner  it  is  given  up,  the  better  for  our  religion.  Let  the 
Upanishads  shine  in  their  glory,  and  at  the  same  time  let  not  quarrels  exist 
among  different  sects.” 

In  Lahore  the  Swami  gave  a  number  of  lectures,  among  which  was  his  famous 
speech  on  the  Vedanta  philosophy,  lasting  over  two  hours.  He  urged  the 
students  of  Lahore  to  cultivate  faith  in  man  as  a  preparation  for  faith  in  God. 
He  asked  them  to  form  an  organization,  purely  non-sectarian  in  character,  to 
teach  hygiene  to  the  poor,  spread  education  among  them,  and  nurse  the  sick. 
One  of  his  missions  in  the  Punjab  was  to  establish  harmony  among  people 
belonging  to  different  sects,  such  as  the  Arya  Samajists  and  the  orthodox  Hindus. 
It  was  in  Lahore  that  the  Swami  met  Mr.  Tirtha  Ram  Goswami,  then  a  profes¬ 
sor  of  mathematics,  who  eventually  gained  wide  recognition  as  Swami  Ram 
Tirtha.  The  professor  became  an  ardent  admirer  of  Swami  Vivekananda. 

Next  the  Swami  travelled  to  Dehra-Dun,  where,  for  the  first  ten  days,  he 
lived  a  rather  quiet  life.  But  soon  he  organized  a  daily  class  on  the  Hindu 
scriptures  for  his  disciples  and  companions,  which  he  continued  to  conduct 
during  the  whole  trip.  At  the  earnest  invitation  of  his  beloved  disciple  the  Raja 
of  Khetri,  he  visited  his  capital,  stopping  on  the  way  at  Delhi  and  Alwar,  which 


132 


Vivekananda 


were  familiar  to  him  from  his  days  of  wandering  prior  to  his  going  to  America. 
Everywhere  he  met  old  friends  and  disciples  and  treated  them  with  marked 
affection.  The  Raja  of  Khetri  lavished  great  honours  upon  him  and  also  gave 
him  a  handsome  donation  for  the  Belur  Math,  which  was  being  built  at  that 
time. 

Before  returning  to  Calcutta,  he  visited  Kishengarh,  Ajmere,  Jodhpur,  Indore, 
and  Khandwa  and  thus  finished  his  lecture  tour  in  North  India.  During  this 
tour  he  explained  to  his  fellow  countrymen  the  salient  features  of  Hinduism 
and  told  them  that  they  would  have  a  glorious  future  if  they  followed  the 
heritage  of  their  past.  He  emphasized  that  the  resurgent  nationalism  of  India 
must  be  based  on  her  spiritual  ideals,  but  that  healthy  scientific  and  techno¬ 
logical  knowledge  from  the  West,  also,  had  to  be  assimilated  in  the  process  of 
growth.  The  fundamental  problem  of  India,  he  pointed  out,  was  to  organize 
the  whole  country  around  religious  ideals.  By  religion  the  Swami  meant  not 
local  customs  which  served  only  a  contemporary  purpose,  but  the  eternal  prin¬ 
ciples  taught  in  the  Vedas. 

Wherever  the  Swami  went  he  never  wearied  of  trying  to  rebuild  individual 
character  in  India,  pointing  out  that  the  strength  of  the  whole  nation  depended 
upon  the  strength  of  the  individual.  Therefore  each  individual,  he  urged,  what¬ 
ever  might  be  his  occupation,  should  try,  if  he  desired  the  good  of  the  nation 
as  a  whole,  to  build  up  his  character  and  acquire  such  virtues  as  courage, 
strength,  self-respect,  love,  and  service  of  others.  To  the  young  men,  especially, 
he  held  out  renunciation  and  service  as  the  highest  ideal.  He  preached  the 
necessity  of  spreading  a  real  knowledge  of  Sanskrit,  without  which  a  Hindu 
would  remain  an  alien  to  his  own  rich  culture.  To  promote  unity  among  the 
Hindus,  he  encouraged  intermarriage  between  castes  and  sub-castes,  and  wanted 
to  revive  the  Indian  universities  so  that  they  might  produce  real  patriots,  rather 
than  clerks,  lawyers,  diplomats,  and  Government  officials. 

Swami  Vivekananda’s  keen  intellect  saw  the  need  of  uniting  the  Hindus 
and  Moslems  on  the  basis  of  the  Advaita  philosophy,  which  teaches  the  oneness 
of  all.  On  June  10,  1898,  he  wrote  to  a  Moslem  gentleman  at  Nainital: 

The  Hindus  may  get  the  credit  for  arriving  at  Advaitism  earlier  than  other  races,  they 
being  an  older  race  than  either  the  Hebrew  or  the  Arab;  yet  practical  Advaitism,  which 
looks  upon  and  behaves  towards  all  mankind  as  one’s  own  soul,  is  yet  to  be  developed 
among  the  Hindus  universally.  On  the  other  hand,  our  experience  is  that  if  ever  the 
followers  of  any  religion  approach  to  this  equality  in  an  appreciable  degree  on  the  plane 
of  practical  work-a-day  life — it  may  be  quite  unconscious  generally  of  the  deeper  mean¬ 
ing  and  the  underlying  principle  of  such  conduct,  which  the  Hindus  as  a  rule  so  clearly 
perceive — it  is  those  of  Islam  and  Islam  alone. 

Therefore  we  are  firmly  persuaded  that  without  the  help  of  practical  Islam,  the  theories 
of  Vedantism,  however  fine  and  wonderful  they  may  be,  are  entirely  valueless  to  the 
vast  mass  of  mankind.  We  want  to  lead  mankind  to  the  place  where  there  is  neither 
the  Vedas  nor  the  Bible  nor  the  Koran;  yet  this  has  to  be  done  by  harmonizing  the 
Vedas,  the  Bible,  and  the  Koran.  Mankind  ought  to  be  taught  that  religions  are  but 
the  varied  expressions  of  the  Religion  which  is  Oneness,  so  that  each  may  choose  the 
path  that  suits  him  best. 

For  our  own  motherland  a  junction  of  the  two  great  systems,  Hinduism  and  Islam — 
Vedantic  brain  and  Islamic  body — is  the  only  hope. 


Vivekananda  133 

I  see  in  my  mind's  eye  the  future  perfect  India  rising  out  of  this  chaos  and  strife, 
glorious  and  invincible,  with  Vedantic  brain  and  Islamic  body. 

For  the  regeneration  of  India,  in  the  Swami’s  view,  the  help  of  the  West  was 
indispensable.  The  thought  of  India  had  been  uppermost  in  his  mind  when  he 
had  journeyed  to  America.  On  April  6,  1897,  the  Swami,  in  the  course  of  a 
letter  to  the  lady  editor  of  an  Indian  magazine,  had  written:  “It  has  been  for 
the  good  of  India  that  religious  preaching  in  the  West  has  been  done  and  will 
be  done.  It  has  ever  been  my  conviction  that  we  shall  not  be  able  to  rise  unless 
the  Western  countries  come  to  our  help.  In  India  no  appreciation  of  merit  can 
be  found,  no  financial  support,  and  what  is  most  lamentable  of  all,  there  is  not 
a  bit  of  practicality/' 

TRAINING  OF  THE  DISCIPLES 

The  year  1898  was  chiefly  devoted  to  the  training  of  Vivekananda’s  disciples, 
both  Indian  and  Western,  and  to  the  consolidation  of  the  work  already  started. 
During  this  period  he  also  made  trips  to  Darjeeling,  Almora,  and  Kashmir. 

In  February  1898,  the  monastery  was  removed  from  Alambazar  to  Nilambar 
Mukherjee’s  garden  house  in  the  village  of  Belur,  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Ganges. 
The  Swami,  while  in  Calcutta,  lived  at  Balaram  Bose’s  house,  which  had  been 
a  favourite  haunt  of  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  during  his  lifetime.  But  he  had  no  rest 
either  in  the  monastery  or  in  Calcutta,  where  streams  of  visitors  came  to  him 
daily.  Moreover,  conducting  a  heavy  correspondence  consumed  much  of  his 
time  and  energy;  one  cannot  but  be  amazed  at  the  hundreds  of  letters  the 
Swami  wrote  with  his  own  hand  to  friends  and  disciples.  Most  of  these  reveal 
his  intense  thinking,  and  some  his  superb  wit. 

While  at  the  monastery,  he  paid  especial  attention  to  the  training  of  the 
sannyasins  and  the  brahmacharins,  who,  inspired  by  his  message,  had  renounced 
home  and  dedicated  themselves  to  the  realization  of  God  and  the  service  of 
humanity.  Besides  conducting  regular  classes  on  the  Upanishads,  the  Bhagavad 
Gita,  the  physical  sciences,  and  the  history  of  the  nations,  he  would  spend 
hours  with  the  students  in  meditation  and  devotional  singing.  Spiritual  practices 
were  intensified  on  holy  days. 

In  the  early  part  of  1898,  the  site  of  the  Belur  Math,  the  present  Head¬ 
quarters  of  the  Ramakrishna  Math  and  Mission,  was  purchased  with  the  help 
of  a  generous  donation  from  Miss  Muller,  the  devoted  admirer  of  the  Swami. 
Mrs.  Ole  Bull  gave  another  handsome  gift  to  complete  the  construction,  and 
the  shrine  at  the  Belur  Math  was  consecrated,  as  we  shall  see,  on  December  9, 
1898.  Sometime  during  this  period  the  Swami  initiated  into  the  monastic  life 
Swami  Swarupananda,  whom  he  considered  to  be  a  real  “acquisition.”  This 
qualified  aspirant  was  given  initiation  after  only  a  few  days’  stay  at  the  mon¬ 
astery,  contrary  to  the  general  rule  of  the  Ramakrishna  Order.  Later  he  became 
editor  of  the  monthly  magazine  Prabuddha  Bharata,  and  president  of  the 
Advaita  Asrama  at  Mayavati,  in  the  Himalayas. 

Among  the  Western  devotees  who  lived  with  Swami  Vivekananda  at  this 
time  were  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sevier,  Mrs.  Ole  Bull,  Miss  Henrietta  F.  Muller,  Miss 
Josephine  MacLeod,  and  Miss  Margaret  E.  Noble,  all  of  whom  travelled  with 
him  at  various  times  in  Northern  India.  The  Seviers  identified  themselves  com- 


134 


Vivekananda 


pletely  with  the  work  at  the  Mayavati  Advaita  Asrama.  Mrs.  Ole  Bull,  the  wife  of 
the  famous  Norwegian  violinist,  and  a  lady  of  social  position,  great  culture,  and 
large  heart,  had  been  an  ardent  admirer  of  the  Swami  during  his  American  trip. 
Miss  Muller,  who  knew  the  Swami  in  both  England  and  America  and  had 
helped  defray,  together  with  the  Seviers  and  Mr.  Sturdy,  the  expenses  of  his 
work  in  England,  had  come  to  India  to  organize  an  educational  institution  for 
Indian  women. 

Miss  MacLeod  had  attended  Swami  Vivekananda’s  classes  in  New  York,  and 
for  months  at  a  time  he  had  been  the  guest  of  her  relatives  at  their  country 
home,  Ridgely  Manor.  She  became  his  life-long  friend  and  admirer  and  cher¬ 
ished  his  memory  till  the  last  day  of  her  life,  but  though  she  was  devoted  to 
him,  she  never  renounced  her  independence,  nor  did  he  demand  that  she  should. 
By  way  of  spiritual  instruction,  the  Swami  had  once  asked  Miss  MacLeod  to 
meditate  on  Om  for  a  week  and  report  to  him  afterwards.  When  the  teacher 
inquired  how  she  felt,  she  said  that  “it  was  like  a  glow  in  the  heart/'  He 
encouraged  her  and  said:  “Good,  keep  on/'  Many  years  later  she  told  her  friends 
that  the  Swami  made  her  realize  that  she  was  in  eternity.  “Always  remember/’ 
the  Swami  had  admonished  her,  “you  are  incidentally  an  American  and  a 
woman,  but  always  a  child  of  God.  Tell  yourself  day  and  night  who  you  are. 
Never  forget  it.”  To  her  brother-in-law,  Francis  H.  Leggett,  the  Swami  had 
written,  on  July  6,  1896,  in  appreciation  of  Miss  MacLeod:  “I  simply  admire 
Joe  Joe  for  her  tact  and  quiet  ways.  She  is  a  feminine  statesman.  She  could 
wield  a  kingdom.  I  have  seldom  seen  such  strong  yet  good  common  sense  in  a 
human  being.” 

When  Miss  MacLeod  asked  the  Swaini’s  permission  to  come  to  India,  he 
wrote  on  a  postcard:  “Do  come  by  all  means,  only  you  must  remember  this: 
The  Europeans  and  Indians  live  as  oil  and  water.  Even  to  speak  of  living  with 
the  natives  is  damning,  even  at  the  capitals.  You  will  have  to  bear  with  people 
who  wear  only  a  loin-cloth;  you  will  see  me  with  only  a  loin-cloth  about  me. 
Dirt  and  filth  everywhere,  and  brown  people.  But  you  will  have  plenty  of  men 
to  talk  philosophy  to  you.”  He  also  wrote  to  her  that  she  must  not  come  to 
India  if  she  expected  anything  else,  for  the  Indians  could  not  “bear  one  more 
word  of  criticism.” 

On  one  occasion,  while  travelling  in  Kashmir  with  the  Swami  and  his  party, 
she  happened  to  make  a  laughing  remark  about  one  of  his  South  Indian  dis¬ 
ciples  with  the  caste-mark  of  the  brahmins  of  his  sect  on  his  forehead.  This 
appeared  grotesque  to  her.  The  Swami  turned  upon  her  “like  a  lion,  withered 
her  with  a  glance,  and  cried:  ‘Hands  off!  Who  are  you?  What  have  you  ever 
done?'  ” 

Miss  MacLeod  was  crestfallen.  But  later  she  learnt  that  the  same  poor 
brahmin  had  been  one  of  those  who,  by  begging,  had  collected  the  money  that 
had  made  it  possible  for  the  Swami  to  undertake  his  trip  to  America. 

“How  can  I  best  help  you,”  she  asked  the  Swami  when  she  arrived  in  India. 
“Love  India,”  was  his  reply. 

One  day  Swami  Vivekananda  told  Miss  MacLeod  that  since  his  return  to 
India  he  had  had  no  personal  money.  She  at  once  promised  to  pay  him  fifty 
dollars  a  month  as  long  as  he  lived  and  immediately  gave  him  three  hundred 


Vivekananda  135 

dollars  for  six  months  in  advance.  The  Swami  asked  jokingly  if  it  would  be 
enough  for  him. 

“Not  if  you  take  heavy  cream  every  day!”  she  said. 

The  Swami  gave  the  money  to  Swami  Trigunatita  to  defray  the  initial 
expenses  of  the  newly  started  Bengali  magazine,  the  Udbodhan. 

But  of  all  Swami  Vivekananda’s  Western  disciples,  the  most  remarkable  was 
Margaret  E.  Noble,  who  was  truly  his  spiritual  daughter.  She  had  attended  the 
Swami’s  classes  and  lectures  in  London  and  resolved  to  dedicate  her  life  to  his 
work  in  India.  When  she  expressed  to  him  her  desire  to  come  to  India,  the 
Swami  wrote  to  her,  on  July  29,  1897:  “Let  me  tell  you  frankly  that  I  am  now 
convinced  that  you  have  a  great  future  in  the  work  for  India.  What  was  wanted 
was  not  a  man  but  a  woman,  a  real  lioness,  to  work  for  the  Indians — women 
especially.  India  cannot  yet  produce  great  women;  she  must  borrow  them  from 
other  nations.  Your  education,  sincerity,  purity,  immense  love,  determination, 
and  above  all,  your  Celtic  blood,  make  you  just  the  woman  wanted. 

Wet  the  difficulties  are  many.  You  cannot  form  any  idea  of  the  misery,  the 
superstition,  and  the  slavery  that  are  here.  You  will  be  in  the  midst  of  a  mass 
of  half-naked  men  and  women  with  quaint  ideas  of  caste  and  isolation,  shun¬ 
ning  the  white-skins  through  fear  or  hatred,  and  hated  by  them  intensely.  On 
the  other  hand,  you  will  be  looked  upon  by  the  white  as  a  crank,  and  every  one 
of  your  movements  will  be  watched  with  suspicion. 

“Then  the  climate  is  fearfully  hot,  our  winter  in  most  places  being  like  your 
summer,  and  in  the  south  it  is  always  blazing.  Not  one  European  comfort  is  to 
be  had  in  places  out  of  the  cities.  If  in  spite  of  all  this  you  dare  venture  into 
the  work,  you  are  welcome,  a  hundred  times  welcome.  As  for  me,  I  am  nobody 
here  as  elsewhere,  but  what  little  influence  I  have  shall  be  devoted  to  your 
service. 

“You  must  think  well  before  you  plunge  in,  and  afterwards  if  you  fail  in  this 
or  get  disgusted,  on  my  part  I  promise  you  I  will  stand  by  you  unto  death , 
whether  you  work  for  India  or  not,  whether  you  give  up  Vedanta  or  remain  in  it. 
'The  tusks  of  the  elephant  come  out  but  never  go  back’ — so  are  the  words  of  a 
man  never  retracted.  I  promise  you  that.”  He  further  asked  her  to  stand  on  her 
own  feet  and  never  seek  help  from  his  other  Western  women  devotees. 

Miss  Noble  came  to  India  on  January  28,  1898,  to  work  with  Miss  Muller 
for  the  education  of  Indian  women.  The  Swami  warmly  introduced  her  to  the 
public  of  Calcutta  as  a  “gift  of  England  to  India,”  and  in  March  made  her 
take  the  vow  of  brahmacharya,  that  is  to  say,  the  life  of  a  religious  celibate 
devoted  to  the  realization  of  God.  He  also  gave  her  the  name  of  Nivedita,  the 
“Dedicated,”  by  which  she  has  ever  since  been  cherished  by  the  Indians  with 
deep  respect  and  affection.  The  ceremony  was  performed  in  the  chapel  of  the 
monastery.  He  first  taught  her  how  to  worship  Siva  and  then  made  the  whole 
ceremony  culminate  in  an  offering  at  the  feet  of  Buddha. 

“Go  thou,”  he  said,  “and  follow  him  who  was  born  and  gave  his  life  for  others 
five  hundred  times  before  he  attained  the  vision  of  the  Buddha.” 

The  Swami  now  engaged  himself  in  the  training  of  Sister  Nivedita  along  with 
the  other  Western  disciples.  And  certainly  it  was  a  most  arduous  task.  They 
were  asked  to  associate  intimately  with  the  Holy  Mother,  the  widow  of  Sri 


Vivekananda 


136 

Ramakrishna,  who  at  once  adopted  them  as  her  “children.  ’  Then  the  Swami 
would  visit  them  almost  daily  to  reveal  to  them  the  deep  secrets  of  the  Indian 
world — its  history,  folklore,  customs,  and  traditions.  Mercilessly  he  tried  to 
uproot  from  their  minds  all  preconceived  notions  and  wrong  ideas  about  India. 
He  wanted  them  to  love  India  as  she  was  at  the  present  time,  with  her  poverty, 
ignorance,  and  backwardness,  and  not  the  India  of  yore,  when  she  had  produced 
great  philosophies,  epics,  dramas,  and  religious  systems. 

It  was  not  always  easy  for  the  Western  disciples  to  understand  the  religious 
ideals  and  forms  of  worship  of  the  Hindus.  For  instance,  one  day  in  the  great 
Kali  temple  of  Calcutta,  one  Western  lady  shuddered  at  the  sight  of  the  blood 
of  the  goats  sacrificed  before  the  Deity,  and  exclaimed,  “Why  is  there  blood 
before  the  Goddess?”  Quickly  the  Swami  retorted,  “Why  not  a  little  blood  to 
complete  the  picture?” 

The  disciples  had  been  brought  up  in  the  tradition  of  Protestant  Christianity, 
in  which  the  Godhead  was  associated  only  with  what  was  benign  and  beautiful, 
and  Satan  with  the  opposite. 

With  a  view  to  Hinduizing  their  minds,  the  Swami  asked  his  Western  dis¬ 
ciples  to  visit  Hindu  ladies  at  their  homes  and  to  observe  their  dress,  food,  and 
customs,  which  were  radically  different  from  their  own.  Thus  he  put  to  a  severe 
test  their  love  for  Vedanta  and  India.  In  the  West  they  had  regarded  the  Swami 
as  a  prophet  showing  them  the  path  of  liberation,  and  as  a  teacher  of  the 
universal  religion.  But  in  India  he  appeared  before  them,  in  addition,  in  the 
role  of  a  patriot,  an  indefatigable  worker  for  the  regeneration  of  his  motherland. 

The  Swami  began  to  teach  Nivedita  to  lose  herself  completely  in  the  Indian 
consciousness.  She  gradually  adopted  the  food,  clothes,  language,  and  general 
habits  of  the  Hindus. 

“You  have  to  set  yourself,”  he  said  to  her,  “to  Hinduize  your  thoughts,  your 
needs,  your  conceptions,  your  habits.  Your  life,  internal  and  external,  has  to 
become  all  that  an  orthodox  brahmin  brahmacharini’s  ought  to  be.  The  method 
will  come  to  you  if  you  only  desire  it  sufficiently.  But  you  have  to  forget  your 
past  and  cause  it  to  be  forgotten.”  He  wanted  her  to  address  the  Hindus  “in 
terms  of  their  own  orthodoxy.” 

Swami  Vivekananda  would  not  tolerate  in  his  Western  disciples  any  trace  of 
chauvinism,  any  patronizing  attitude  or  stupid  criticism  of  the  Indian  way  of 
life.  They  could  serve  India  only  if  they  loved  India,  and  they  could  love  India 
only  if  they  knew  India,  her  past  glories  and  her  present  problems.  Thus  later  he 
took  them  on  his  trip  to  Northern  India,  including  Almora  and  Kashmir,  and 
told  them  of  the  sanctity  of  Benares  and  the  magnificence  of  Agra  and  Delhi; 
he  related  to  them  the  history  of  the  Moghul  Emperors  and  the  Rajput  heroes, 
and  also  described  the  peasant’s  life,  the  duties  of  a  farm  housewife,  and  the 
hospitality  of  poor  villagers  to  wandering  monks.  The  teacher  and  his  disciples 
saw  together  the  sacred  rivers,  the  dense  forests,  the  lofty  mountains,  the  sun¬ 
baked  plains,  the  hot  sands  of  the  desert,  and  the  gravel  beds  of  the  rivers,  all 
of  which  had  played  their  parts  in  the  creation  of  Indian  culture.  And  the 
Swami  told  them  that  in  India  custom  and  culture  were  one.  The  visible  mani¬ 
festations  of  the  culture  were  the  system  of  caste,  the  duties  determined  by  the 
different  stages  of  life,  the  respect  of  parents  as  incarnate  gods,  the  appointed 


Vivekananda 


137 


hours  of  religious  service,  the  shrine  used  for  daily  worship,  the  chanting  of  the 
Vedas  by  the  brahmin  children,  the  eating  of  food  with  the  right  hand  and  its 
use  in  worship  and  japa,  the  austerities  of  Hindu  widows,  the  kneeling  in  prayer 
of  the  Moslems  wherever  the  time  of  prayer  might  find  them,  and  the  ideal  of 
equality  practised  by  the  followers  of  Mohammed. 

Nivedita  possessed  an  aggressively  Occidental  and  intensely  English  outlook. 
It  was  not  easy  for  her  to  eradicate  instinctive  national  loyalties  and  strong 
personal  likes  and  dislikes.  A  clash  between  the  teacher  and  the  disciple  was 
inevitable.  Ruthlessly  the  Swami  crushed  her  pride  in  her  English  upbringing. 
Perhaps,  at  the  same  time,  he  wanted  to  protect  her  against  the  passionate 
adoration  she  had  for  him.  Nivedita  suffered  bitter  anguish. 

The  whole  thing  reached  its  climax  while  they  were  travelling  together,  some 
time  after,  in  the  Himalayas.  One  day  Miss  MacLeod  thought  that  Nivedita 
could  no  longer  bear  the  strain,  and  interceded  kindly  and  gravely  with  the 
Swami.  “He  listened/'  Sister  Nivedita  wrote  later,  “and  went  away.  At  evening, 
however,  he  returned,  and  finding  us  together  on  the  veranda,  he  turned  to  her 
(Miss  MacLeod)  and  said  with  the  simplicity  of  a  child:  ‘You  were  right.  There 
must  be  a  change.  I  am  going  away  to  the  forests  to  be  alone,  and  when  I  come 
back  I  shall  bring  peace.'  Then  he  turned  away  and  saw  that  above  us  the 
moon  was  new,  and  a  sudden  exaltation  came  into  his  voice  as  he  said:  ‘See, 
the  Mohammedans  think  much  of  the  new  moon.  Let  us  also,  with  the  new 
moon,  begin  a  new  life.’  "  As  he  said  these  words,  he  lifted  his  hand  and  blessed 
his  rebellious  disciple,  who  by  this  time  was  kneeling  before  him.  It  was  as¬ 
suredly  a  moment  of  wonderful  sweetness  of  reconciliation. 

That  evening  in  meditation  Nivedita  found  herself  gazing  deep  into  an 
Infinite  Good,  to  the  recognition  of  which  no  egotistic  reasoning  had  led  her. 
“And,”  she  wrote,  “I  understood  for  the  first  time  that  the  greatest  teachers 
may  destroy  in  us  a  personal  relation  only  in  order  to  bestow  the  Impersonal 
Vision  in  its  place.” 

To  resume  our  story,  on  March  30,  1898,  the  Swami  left  for  Darjeeling,  for 
he  badly  needed  a  change  to  the  cool  air  of  the  Himalayas.  Hardly  had  he  begun 
to  feel  the  improvement  in  his  health,  when  he  had  to  come  down  to  Calcutta, 
where  an  outbreak  of  plague  was  striking  terror. 

Immediately  he  made  plans  for  relief  work  with  the  help  of  the  members  of 
the  monastery  and  volunteers  from  Calcutta. 

When  a  brother  disciple  asked  him  where  he  would  get  funds,  the  Swami 
replied:  “Why,  we  shall  sell  if  necessary  the  land  which  has  just  been  purchased 
for  the  monastery.  We  are  sannyasins;  we  must  be  ready  to  sleep  under  the 
trees  and  live  on  alms  as  we  did  before.  Must  we  care  for  the  monastery  and 
possessions  when  by  disposing  of  them  we  could  relieve  thousands  of  helpless 
people  suffering  before  our  own  eyes?”  Fortunately  this  extreme  step  was  not 
necessary;  the  public  gave  him  money  for  the  relief  work. 

The  Swami  worked  hard  to  assuage  the  suffering  of  the  afflicted  people.  Their 
love  and  admiration  for  him  knew  no  bounds  as  they  saw  this  practical  appli¬ 
cation  of  Vedanta  at  a  time  of  human  need. 

The  plague  having  been  brought  under  control,  the  Swami  left  Calcutta  for 


Vivekananda 


138 

Nainital  on  May  11,  accompanied  by,  among  others,  his  Western  disciples. 
From  there  the  party  went  to  Almora  where  they  met  the  Seviers.  During  this 
tour  the  Swami  never  ceased  instructing  his  disciples.  For  his  Western  compan¬ 
ions  it  was  a  rare  opportunity  to  learn  Indian  history,  religion,  and  philosophy 
direct  from  one  who  was  an  incarnation  of  the  spirit  of  India.  Some  of  the 
talks  the  Swami  gave  were  recorded  by  Sister  Nivedita  in  her  charming  book 
Notes  of  Some  Wanderings  with  the  Swami  Vivekananda. 

In  Almora  the  Swami  received  news  of  the  deaths  of  Pavhari  Baba  and  Mr. 
Goodwin.  He  had  been  closely  drawn  to  the  former  during  his  days  of  wander¬ 
ing.  Goodwin  died  on  June  2.  Hearing  of  this  irreparable  loss,  the  Swami 
exclaimed  in  bitter  grief,  “My  right  hand  is  gone!”  To  Goodwin's  mother  he 
wrote  a  letter  of  condolence  in  which  he  said:  “The  debt  of  gratitude  I  owe 
him  can  never  be  repaid,  and  those  who  think  they  have  been  helped  by  any 
thought  of  mine  ought  to  know  that  almost  every  word  of  it  was  published 
through  the  untiring  and  most  unselfish  exertions  of  Mr.  Goodwin.  In  him  I 
have  lost  a  friend  true  as  steel,  a  disciple  of  never-failing  devotion,  a  worker 
who  knew  not  what  tiring  was,  and  the  world  is  less  rich  by  the  passing  away 
of  one  of  those  few  who  are  born,  as  it  were,  to  live  only  for  others.” 

The  Swami  also  sent  her  the  following  poem,  which  he  had  written  in  mem¬ 
ory  of  Goodwin,  bearing  witness  to  the  affection  of  the  teacher  for  the  disciple: 

REQUIESCAT  IN  PACE 

Speed  forth,  O  soul!  upon  thy  star-strewn  path; 

Speed,  blissful  one!  where  thought  is  ever  free, 

Where  time  and  space  no  longer  mist  the  view; 

Eternal  peace  and  blessings  be  with  thee! 

Thy  service  true,  complete  thy  sacrifice; 

Thy  home  the  heart  of  love  transcendent  find! 

Remembrance  sweet,  that  kills  all  space  and  time, 

Like  altar  roses,  fill  thy  place  behind! 

Thy  bonds  are  broke,  thy  quest  in  bliss  is  found, 

And  one  with  That  which  comes  as  death  and  life, 

Thou  helpful  one!  unselfish  e’er  on  earth, 

Ahead,  still  help  with  love  this  world  of  strife! 

Before  the  Swami  left  Almora,  he  arranged  to  start  again  the  monthly  maga¬ 
zine  Prabuddha  Bharata ,  which  had  ceased  publication  with  the  death  of  its 
gifted  editor,  B.  R.  Rajam  Iyer.  Swami  Swarupananda  became  its  new  editor, 
and  Captain  Sevier,  the  manager.  The  magazine  began  its  new  career  at  Almora. 
Then,  on  June  11,  the  Swami,  in  the  company  of  his  Western  disciples,  left 
for  Kashmir  as  the  guest  of  Mrs.  Ole  Bull. 

The  trip  to  Kashmir  was  an  unforgettable  experience  for  the  Westerners. 
The  natural  beauty  of  the  country,  with  its  snow-capped  mountains  reflected 
in  the  water  of  the  lakes,  its  verdant  forests,  multi-coloured  flowers,  and  stately 
poplar  and  chennar  trees,  make  the  valley  of  Kashmir  a  paradise  on  earth. 
Throughout  the  journey  the  Swami  poured  out  his  heart  and  soul  to  his  dis¬ 
ciples.  At  first  he  was  almost  obsessed  with  the  ideal  of  Siva,  whom  he  had  wor¬ 
shipped  since  boyhood,  and  for  days  he  told  the  disciples  legends  relating  to  the 


Vivekananda 


139 


great  God  of  renunciation.  The  party  spent  a  few  days  in  house-boats,  and 
in  the  afternoons  the  Swami  would  take  his  companions  for  long  walks  across 
the  fields.  The  conversations  were  always  stimulating.  One  day  he  spoke  of 
Genghis  Khan  and  declared  that  he  was  not  a  vulgar  aggressor;  he  compared 
the  Mongol  Emperor  to  Napoleon  and  Alexander,  saying  that  they  all  wanted 
to  unify  the  world  and  that  it  was  perhaps  the  same  soul  that  had  incarnated 
itself  three  times  in  the  hope  of  bringing  about  human  unity  through  political 
conquest.  In  the  same  way,  he  said,  one  Soul  might  have  come  again  and  again 
as  Krishna,  Buddha,  and  Christ,  to  bring  about  the  unity  of  mankind  through 
religion. 

In  Kashmir  the  Swami  pined  for  solitude.  The  desire  for  the  solitary  life  of 
a  monk  became  irresistible;  and  he  would  often  break  away  from  the  little  party 
to  roam  alone.  After  his  return  he  would  make  some  such  remark  as:  “It  is  a 
sin  to  think  of  the  body,”  “It  is  wrong  to  manifest  power,”  or  “Things  do  not 
grow  better;  they  remain  as  they  are.  It  is  we  who  grow  better,  by  the  changes 
we  make  in  ourselves.”  Often  he  seemed  to  be  drifting  without  any  plan,  and 
the  disciples  noticed  his  strange  detachment.  “At  no  time,”  Sister  Nivedita 
wrote,  “would  it  have  surprised  us  had  someone  told  us  that  today  or  tomorrow 
he  would  be  gone  for  ever,  that  we  were  listening  to  his  voice  for  the  last  time.” 

This  planlessness  was  observed  in  him  more  and  more  as  his  earthly  existence 
drew  towards  its  end.  Two  years  later,  when  Sister  Nivedita  gave  him  a  bit  of 
worldly  advice,  the  Swami  exclaimed  in  indignation:  “Plans!  Plans!  That  is 
why  you  Western  people  can  never  create  a  religion!  If  any  of  you  ever  did,  it 
was  only  a  few  Catholic  saints  who  had  no  plans.  Religion  was  never,  never 
preached  by  planners!” 

About  solitude  as  a  spiritual  discipline,  the  Swami  said  one  day  that  an  Indian 
could  not  expect  to  know  himself  till  he  had  been  alone  for  twenty  years, 
whereas  from  the  Western  standpoint  a  man  could  not  live  alone  for  twenty 
years  and  remain  quite  sane.  On  the  Fourth  of  July  the  Swami  gave  a  surprise 
to  his  American  disciples  by  arranging  for  its  celebration  in  an  appropriate 
manner.  An  American  flag  was  made  with  the  help  of  a  brahmin  tailor,  and 
the  Swami  composed  the  following  poem: 

TO  THE  FOURTH  OF  JULY 

Behold,  the  dark  clouds  melt  away 
That  gathered  thick  at  night  and  hung 
So  like  a  gloomy  pall  above  the  earth! 

Before  thy  magic  touch  the  world 
Awakes.  The  birds  in  chorus  sing. 

The  flowers  raise  their  star-like  crowns, 

Dew-set,  and  wave  thee  welcome  fair. 

The  lakes  are  opening  wide,  in  love, 

Their  hundred  thousand  lotus-eyes 
To  welcome  thee  with  all  their  depth. 

All  hail  to  thee,  thou  lord  of  light! 

A  welcome  new  to  thee  today, 

O  sun!  Today  thou  sheddest  liberty! 


140 


Vivekananda 


Bethink  thee  how  the  world  did  wait 
And  search  for  thee,  through  time  and  clime! 

Some  gave  up  home  and  love  of  friends 
And  went  in  quest  of  thee,  self-banished, 

Through  dreary  oceans,  through  primeval  forests, 

Each  step  a  struggle  for  their  life  or  death; 

Then  came  the  day  when  work  bore  fruit, 

And  worship,  love,  and  sacrifice, 

Fulfilled,  accepted,  and  complete. 

Then  thou,  propitious,  rose  to  shed 
The  light  of  freedom  on  mankind. 

Move  on,  O  lord,  in  thy  resistless  path, 

Till  thy  high  noon  o'erspreads  the  world, 

Till  every  land  reflects  thy  light, 

Till  men  and  women,  with  uplifted  head, 

Behold  their  shackles  broken  and  know 
In  springing  joy  their  life  renewed! 

As  the  Swami’s  mood  changed  he  spoke  of  renunciation.  He  showed  scorn  for 
the  worldly  life  and  said:  “As  is  the  difference  between  a  fire-fly  and  the  blazing 
sun,  between  a  little  pond  and  the  infinite  ocean,  a  mustard  seed  and  the  moun¬ 
tain  of  Meru,  such  is  the  difference  between  the  householder  and  the  sannyasin.” 
Had  it  not  been  for  the  ochre  robe,  the  emblem  of  monasticism,  he  pointed  out, 
luxury  and  worldliness  would  have  robbed  man  of  his  manliness. 

Thus  the  party  spent  their  time  on  the  river,  the  teacher  providing  a  veritable 
university  for  the  education  of  his  disciples.  The  conversation  touched  upon 
all  subjects — Vedic  rituals,  Roman  Catholic  doctrine,  Christ,  St.  Paul,  the 
growth  of  Christianity,  Buddha. 

Of  Buddha,  the  Swami  said  that  he  was  the  greatest  man  that  ever  lived. 
“Above  all,  he  never  claimed  worship.  Buddha  said:  ‘Buddha  is  not  a  man, 
but  a  state.  I  have  found  the  way.  Enter  all  of  you!’  ” 

Then  the  talk  would  drift  to  the  conception  of  sin  among  the  Egyptian, 
Semitic,  and  Aryan  races.  According  to  the  Vedic  conception,  the  Swami  said, 
the  Devil  is  the  Lord  of  Anger,  and  with  Buddhists  he  is  Mara,  the  Lord  of 
Lust.  Whereas  in  the  Bible  the  creation  was  under  the  dual  control  of  God  and 
Satan,  in  Hinduism  Satan  represented  defilement,  never  duality. 

Next  the  Swami  would  speak  about  the  chief  characteristics  of  the  different 
nations.  “You  are  so  morbid,  you  Westerners,”  he  said  one  day.  “You  worship 
sorrow!  All  through  your  country  I  found  that.  Social  life  in  the  West  is  like 
a  peal  of  laughter,  but  underneath  it  is  a  wail.  The  whole  things  ends  in  a  sob. 
The  fun  and  frivolity  are  all  on  the  surface;  really,  it  is  full  of  tragic  intensity. 
Here  it  is  sad  and  gloomy  on  the  outside,  but  underneath  are  detachment  and 
merriment.” 

Once,  at  Islamabad,  as  the  group  sat  round  him  on  the  grass  in  an  apple 
orchard,  the  Swami  repeated  what  he  had  said  in  England  after  facing  a 
mad  bull.  Picking  up  two  pebbles  in  his  hand,  he  said:  “Whenever  death 
approaches  me  all  weakness  vanishes.  I  have  neither  fear  nor  doubt  nor  thought 
of  the  external.  I  simply  busy  myself  making  ready  to  die.  I  am  as  hard  as  that” 


Vivekananda  141 

— and  the  stones  struck  each  other  in  his  hand — “for  I  have  touched  the  feet 
of  God!" 

At  Islamabad  the  Swami  announced  his  desire  to  make  a  pilgrimage  to  the 
great  image  of  Siva  in  the  cave  of  Amarnath  in  the  glacial  valley  of  the  Western 
Himalayas.  He  asked  Nivedita  to  accompany  him  so  that  she,  a  future  worker, 
might  have  direct  knowledge  of  the  Hindu  pilgrim's  life.  They  became  a  part 
of  a  crowd  of  thousands  of  pilgrims,  who  formed  at  each  halting-place  a  whole 
town  of  tents. 

A  sudden  change  came  over  the  Swami.  He  became  one  of  the  pilgrims, 
scrupulously  observing  the  most  humble  practices  demanded  by  custom.  He 
ate  one  meal  a  day,  cooked  in  the  orthodox  fashion,  and  sought  solitude  as 
far  as  possible  to  tell  his  beads  and  practise  meditation.  In  order  to  reach  the 
destination,  he  had  to  climb  up  rocky  slopes  along  dangerous  paths,  cross  several 
miles  of  glacier,  and  bathe  in  the  icy  water  of  sacred  streams. 

On  August  2  the  party  arrived  at  the  enormous  cavern,  large  enough  to  con¬ 
tain  a  vast  cathedral.  At  the  back  of  the  cave,  in  a  niche  of  deepest  shadow, 
stood  the  image  of  Siva,  all  ice.  The  Swami,  who  had  fallen  behind,  entered 
the  cave,  his  whole  frame  shaking  with  emotion.  His  naked  body  was  smeared 
with  ashes,  and  his  face  radiant  with  devotion.  Then  he  prostrated  himself  in  the 
darkness  of  the  cave  before  that  glittering  whiteness. 

A  song  of  praise  from  hundreds  of  throats  echoed  in  the  cavern.  The  Swami 
almost  fainted.  He  had  a  vision  of  Siva  Himself.  The  details  of  the  experience 
he  never  told  anyone,  except  that  he  had  been  granted  the  grace  of  Amarnath, 
the  Lord  of  Immortality,  not  to  die  until  he  himself  willed  it. 

The  effect  of  the  experience  shattered  his  nerves.  When  he  emerged  from 
the  grotto,  there  was  a  clot  of  blood  in  his  left  eye;  his  heart  was  dilated  and 
never  regained  its  normal  condition.  For  days  he  spoke  of  nothing  but  Siva. 
He  said:  “The  image  was  the  Lord  Himself.  It  was  all  worship  there.  I  have 
never  seen  anything  so  beautiful,  so  inspiring." 

On  August  8  the  party  arrived  at  Srinagar,  where  they  remained  until  Septem¬ 
ber  30.  During  this  period  the  Swami  felt  an  intense  desire  for  meditation  and 
solitude.  The  Maharaja  of  Kashmir  treated  him  with  the  utmost  respect  and 
wanted  him  to  choose  a  tract  of  land  for  the  establishment  of  a  monastery 
and  a  Sanskrit  college.  The  land  was  selected  and  the  proposal  sent  to  the  British 
Resident  for  approval.  But  the  British  Agent  refused  to  grant  the  land.  The 
Swami  accepted  the  whole  thing  philosophically. 

A  month  later  his  devotion  was  directed  to  Kali,  the  Divine  Mother,  whom 
Ramakrishna  had  called  affectionately  “my  Mother." 

A  unique  symbol  of  the  Godhead,  Kali  represents  the  totality  of  the  universe: 
creation  and  destruction,  life  and  death,  good  and  evil,  pain  and  pleasure,  and 
all  the  pairs  of  opposites.  She  seems  to  be  black  when  viewed  from  a  distance, 
like  the  water  of  the  ocean;  but  to  the  intimate  observer  She  is  without  colour, 
being  one  with  Brahman,  whose  creative  energy  She  represents. 

In  one  aspect  She  appears  terrible,  with  a  garland  of  human  skulls,  a  girdle 
of  human  fingers,  her  tongue  dripping  blood,  a  decapitated  human  head  in 
one  hand  and  a  shining  sword  in  the  other,  surrounded  by  jackals  that  haunt 
the  cremation  ground — a  veritable  picture  of  terror.  The  other  side  is  benign 


142 


Vivekananda 


and  gracious,  ready  to  confer  upon  Her  devotees  the  boon  of  immortality. 
She  reels  as  if  drunk:  who  could  have  created  this  mad  world  except  in  a  fit 
of  drunkenness?  Kali  stands  on  the  bosom  of  Her  Divine  Consort,  Siva,  the 
symbol  of  Brahman;  for  Kali,  or  Nature,  cannot  work  unless  energized  by  the 
touch  of  the  Absolute.  And  in  reality  Brahman  and  Kali,  the  Absolute  and 
Its  Creative  Energy,  are  identical,  like  fire  and  its  power  to  burn. 

The  Hindu  mind  does  not  make  a  sweepingly  moralistic  distinction  between 
good  and  evil.  Both  are  facts  of  the  phenomenal  world  and  are  perceived 
to  exist  when  maya  hides  the  Absolute,  which  is  beyond  good  and  evil.  Rama- 
krishna  emphasized  the  benign  aspect  of  the  Divine  Mother  Kali  and  propitiated 
Her  to  obtain  the  vision  of  the  Absolute.  Swami  Vivekananda  suddenly  felt 
the  appeal  of  Her  destructive  side.  But  is  there  really  any  difference  between 
the  process  of  creation  and  destruction?  Is  not  the  one  without  the  other  an 
illusion  of  the  mind? 

Vivekananda  realized  that  the  Divine  Mother  is  omnipresent.  Wherever  he 
turned,  he  was  conscious  of  the  presence  of  the  Mother,  “as  if  She  were  a 
person  in  the  room.”  He  felt  that  it  was  She  “whose  hands  are  clasped  with  my 
own  and  who  leads  me  as  though  I  were  a  child/'  It  was  touching  to  see  him 
worship  the  four-year-old  daughter  of  his  Mohammedan  boatman  as  the  symbol 
of  the  Divine  Mother. 

His  meditation  cn  Kali  became  intense,  and  one  day  he  had  a  most  vivid 
experience.  He  centred  “his  whole  attention  on  the  dark,  the  painful,  and  the 
inscrutable”  aspect  of  Reality,  with  a  determination  to  reach  by  this  particular 
path  the  Non-duality  behind  phenomena.  His  whole  frame  trembled,  as  if  from 
an  electric  shock.  He  had  a  vision  of  Kali,  the  mighty  Destructress  lurking 
behind  the  veil  of  life,  the  Terrible  One,  hidden  by  the  dust  of  the  living 
who  pass  by,  and  all  the  appearances  raised  by  their  feet.  In  a  fever,  he  groped 
in  the  dark  for  pencil  and  paper  and  wrote  his  famous  poem  “Kali  the  Mother”; 
then  he  fell  exhausted: 


The  stars  are  blotted  out, 

The  clouds  are  covering  clouds, 

It  is  darkness,  vibrant,  sonant; 

In  the  roaring,  whirling  wind 
Are  the  souls  of  a  million  lunatics. 
Loosed  from  the  prison-house, 
Wrenching  trees  by  the  roots, 
Sweeping  all  from  the  path. 

The  sea  has  joined  the  fray 
And  swirls  up  mountain-waves 
To  reach  the  pitchy  sky. 

The  flash  of  lurid  light 
Reveals  on  every  side 
A  thousand  thousand  shades 
Of  death,  begrimed  and  black. 

Scattering  plagues  and  sorrows. 
Dancing  mad  with  joy, 

Come,  Mother,  come! 


Vivekananda 


143 


For  terror  is  Thy  name, 

Death  is  in  Thy  breath, 

And  every  shaking  step 
Destroys  a  world  for  e’er. 

Thou  Time,  the  All-destroyer, 

Come,  O  Mother,  come! 

Who  dares  misery  love, 

And  hug  the  form  of  death. 

Enjoy  destruction's  dance — 

To  him  the  Mother  comes. 

The  Swami  now  talked  to  his  disciples  only  about  Kali,  the  Mother,  describing 
Her  as  “time,  change,  and  ceaseless  energy.”  He  would  say  with  the  great 
Psalmist:  “Though  Thou  slay  me,  yet  I  will  trust  in  Thee.” 

“It  is  a  mistake,”  the  Swami  said,  “to  hold  that  with  all  men  pleasure  is  the 
motive.  Quite  as  many  are  born  to  seek  pain.  There  can  be  bliss  in  torture,  too. 
Let  us  worship  terror  for  its  own  sake. 

“Learn  to  recognize  the  Mother  as  instinctively  in  evil,  terror,  sorrow,  and 
annihilation  as  in  that  which  makes  for  sweetness  and  joy! 

“Only  by  the  worship  of  the  Terrible  can  the  Terrible  itself  be  overcome, 
and  immortality  gained.  Meditate  on  death!  Meditate  on  death!  Worship  the 
Terrible,  the  Terrible,  the  Terrible!  And  the  Mother  Herself  is  Brahman!  Even 
Her  curse  is  a  blessing.  The  heart  must  become  a  cremation  ground — pride, 
selfishness,  and  desire  all  burnt  to  ashes.  Then,  and  then  alone,  will  the  Mother 
come.” 

The  Western  disciples,  brought  up  in  a  Western  faith  which  taught  them  to 
see  good,  order,  comfort,  and  beauty  alone  in  the  creation  of  a  wise  Providence, 
were  shaken  by  the  typhoon  of  a  Cosmic  Reality  invoked  by  the  Hindu  vision¬ 
ary.  Sister  Nivedita  writes: 

And  as  he  spoke,  the  underlying  egoism  of  worship  that  is  devoted  to  the  kind  God, 
to  Providence,  the  consoling  Deity,  without  a  heart  for  God  in  the  earthquake  or  God  in 
the  volcano,  overwhelmed  the  listener.  One  saw  that  such  worship  was  at  bottom,  as  the 
Hindu  calls  it,  merely  “shopkeeping,”  and  one  realized  the  infinitely  greater  boldness 
and  truth  of  teaching  that  God  manifests  through  evil  as  well  as  through  good.  One 
saw  that  the  true  attitude  for  the  mind  and  will  that  are  not  to  be  baffled  by  the  per¬ 
sonal  self,  was  in  fact  that  determination,  in  the  stern  words  of  Swami  Vivekananda, 
“to  seek  death,  not  life,  to  hurl  oneself  upon  the  sword’s  point,  to  become  one  with 
the  Terrible  for  evermore.” 

Heroism,  to  Vivekananda,  was  the  soul  of  action.  He  wanted  to  see  Ultimate 
Truth  in  all  its  terrible  nakedness,  and  refused  to  soften  it  in  any  shape  or 
manner.  His  love  of  Truth  expected  nothing  in  return;  he  scorned  the  bargain 
of  “giving  to  get  in  return”  and  all  its  promise  of  paradise. 

But  the  gentle  Ramakrishna,  though  aware  of  the  Godhead  in  all  its  aspects, 
had  emphasized  Its  benign  side.  One  day  several  men  had  been  arguing  before 
him  about  the  attributes  of  God,  attempting  to  find  out,  by  reason,  their  mean¬ 
ing.  Sri  Ramakrishna  stopped  them,  saying:  “Enough,  enough!  What  is  the 
use  of  disputing  whether  the  divine  attributes  are  reasonable  or  not?  .  .  .  You 


144 


Vivekananda 


say  that  God  is  good:  can  you  convince  me  of  His  goodness  by  this  reasoning? 
Look  at  the  flood  that  has  just  caused  the  death  of  thousands.  How  can  you 
prove  that  a  benevolent  God  ordered  it?  You  will  perhaps  reply  that  the  same 
flood  swept  away  uncleanliness  and  watered  the  earth,  and  so  on.  But  could 
not  a  good  God  do  that  without  drowning  thousands  of  innocent  men,  women, 
and  children?" 

Thereupon  one  of  the  disputants  said,  “Then  ought  we  to  believe  that  God 
is  cruel?" 

“O  idiot,"  cried  Ramakrishna,  “who  said  that?  Fold  your  hands  and  say 
humbly,  ‘O  God,  we  are  too  feeble  and  too  weak  to  understand  Thy  nature 
and  Thy  deeds.  Deign  to  enlighten  us!’  Do  not  argue.  Love!" 

God  is  no  doubt  Good,  True,  and  Beautiful;  but  these  attributes  are  utterly 
different  from  their  counterparts  in  the  relative  world. 

The  Swami,  during  these  days,  taught  his  disciples  to  worship  God  like 
heroes.  He  would  say:  “There  must  be  no  fear,  no  begging,  but  demanding 
— demanding  the  Highest.  The  true  devotees  of  the  Mother  are  as  hard  as 
adamant  and  as  fearless  as  lions.  They  are  not  in  the  least  upset  if  the  whole 
universe  suddenly  crumbles  into  dust  at  their  feet.  Make  Her  listen  to  you. 
None  of  that  cringing  to  Mother!  Remember,  She  is  all-powerful;  She  can  make 
heroes  out  of  stones." 

On  September  30  Swami  Vivekananda  retired  to  a  temple  of  the  Divine 
Mother,  where  he  stayed  alone  for  a  week.  There  he  worshipped  the  Deity, 
known  as  Kshirbhavani,  following  the  time-honoured  ritual,  praying  and  medi¬ 
tating  like  a  humble  pilgrim.  Every  morning  he  also  worshipped  a  brahmin’s 
little  daughter  as  the  symbol  of  the  Divine  Virgin.  And  he  was  blessed  with 
deep  experiences,  some  of  which  were  most  remarkable  and  indicated  to  him 
that  his  mission  on  earth  was  finished. 

He  had  a  vision  of  the  Goddess  and  found  Her  a  living  Deity.  But  the  temple 
had  been  destroyed  by  the  Moslem  invaders,  and  the  image  placed  in  a  niche 
surrounded  by  ruins.  Surveying  this  desecration,  the  Swami  felt  distressed  at 
heart  and  said  to  himself:  “How  could  the  people  have  permitted  such  sacrilege 
without  offering  strenuous  resistance?  If  I  had  been  here  then,  I  would  never 
have  allowed  such  a  thing.  I  would  have  laid  down  my  life  to  protect  the 
Mother."  Thereupon  he  heard  the  voice  of  the  Goddess  saying:  “What  if  unbe¬ 
lievers  should  enter  My  temple  and  defile  My  image?  What  is  that  to  you? 
Do  you  protect  Me,  or  do  I  protect  you?”  Referring  to  this  experience  after  his 
return,  he  said  to  his  disciples:  “All  my  patriotism  is  gone.  Everything  is  gone. 
Now  it  is  only  ‘Mother!  Mother!’  I  have  been  very  wrong.  ...  I  am  only  a  little 
child."  Lie  wanted  to  say  more,  but  could  not;  he  declared  that  it  was  not  fitting 
that  he  should  go  on.  Significantly,  he  added  that  spiritually  he  was  no  longer 
bound  to  the  world. 

Another  day,  in  the  course  of  his  worship,  the  thought  flashed  through  the 
Swami’s  mind  that  he  should  try  to  build  a  new  temple  in  the  place  of  the 
present  dilapidated  one,  just  as  he  had  built  a  monastery  and  temple  at  Belur 
to  Sri  Ramakrishna.  He  even  thought  of  trying  to  raise  funds  from  his  wealthy 
American  disciples  and  friends.  At  once  the  Mother  said  to  him:  “My  child! 


Vivekananda  145 

If  I  so  wish  I  can  have  innumerable  temples  and  monastic  centres.  I  can  even 
this  moment  raise  a  seven-storied  golden  temple  on  this  very  spot/' 

‘‘Since  I  heard  that  divine  voice/’  the  Swami  said  to  a  disciple  in  Calcutta 
much  later,  “I  have  ceased  making  any  more  plans.  Let  these  things  be  as 
Mother  wills.” 

Sri  Ramakrishna  had  said  long  ago  that  Narendranath  would  live  in  the 
physical  body  to  do  the  Mother’s  work  and  that  as  soon  as  this  work  was 
finished,  he  would  cast  off  his  body  by  his  own  will.  Were  the  visions  at  the 
temple  of  Kshirbhavani  a  premonition  of  the  approaching  dissolution? 

When  the  Swami  rejoined  his  disciples  at  Srinagar,  he  was  an  altogether  dif¬ 
ferent  person.  He  raised  his  hand  in  benediction  and  then  placed  some  mari¬ 
golds,  which  he  had  offered  to  the  Deity,  on  the  head  of  every  one  of  his 
disciples.  “No  more  ‘Hari  Om!’  ”  he  said.  “It  is  all  ‘Mother’  now!”  Though 
he  lived  with  them,  the  disciples  saw  very  little  of  him.  For  hours  he  would 
stroll  in  the  woods  beside  the  river,  absorbed  within  himself.  One  day  he 
appeared  before  them  with  shaven  head,  dressed  as  the  simplest  sannyasin  and 
with  a  look  of  unapproachable  austerity  on  his  face.  He  repeated  his  own  poem 
“Kali  the  Mother”  and  said,  “It  all  came  true,  every  word  of  it;  and  I  have 
proved  it,  for  I  have  hugged  the  form  of  death.” 

Sister  Nivedita  writes:  “The  physical  ebb  of  the  great  experience  through 
which  he  had  just  passed — for  even  suffering  becomes  impossible  when  a  given 
point  of  weariness  is  reached;  and  similarly,  the  body  refuses  to  harbour  a  certain 
intensity  of  the  spiritual  life  for  an  indefinite  period — was  leaving  him,  doubt¬ 
less,  more  exhausted  than  he  himself  suspected.  All  this  contributed,  one 
imagines,  to  a  feeling  that  none  of  us  knew  for  how  long  a  time  we  might  now 
be  parting.” 

The  party  left  Kashmir  on  October  1 1  and  came  down  to  Lahore.  The  West¬ 
ern  disciples  went  to  Agra,  Delhi,  and  the  other  principal  cities  of  Northern 
India  for  sight-seeing,  and  the  Swami,  accompanied  by  his  disciple  Sadananda, 
arrived  at  Belur  on  October  18.  His  brother  disciples  saw  that  he  was  very  pallid 
and  ill.  He  suffered  from  suffocating  attacks  of  asthma;  when  he  emerged 
from  its  painful  fits,  his  face  looked  blue,  like  that  of  a  drowning  man.  But  in 
spite  of  all,  he  plunged  headlong  into  numerous  activities. 

On  November  12,  1898,  the  day  of  the  worship  of  Kali,  the  Nivedita  Girls’ 
School  was  opened  in  Calcutta.  At  the  end  of  the  inaugural  ceremony  the  Holy 
Mother,  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  consort,  “prayed  that  the  blessing  of  the  Great 
Mother  of  the  universe  might  be  upon  the  school  and  that  the  girls  it  should 
train  might  be  ideal  girls.”  Nivedita,  who  witnessed  the  ceremony  with  the 
Swamis  of  the  Order,  said:  “I  cannot  imagine  a  grander  omen  than  her  blessing 
spoken  over  the  educated  Hindu  womanhood  of  the  future.” 

The  dedication  of  the  school  was  the  beginning  of  Nivedita’s  work  in  India. 
The  Swami  gave  her  complete  freedom  about  the  way  to  run  it.  He  told  her  that 
she  was  free  from  her  collaborators  if  she  so  chose;  and  that  she  might,  if  she 
wished,  give  the  work  a  “definite  religious  colour”  or  even  make  it  sectarian. 
Then  he  added,  “You  may  wish  through  a  sect  to  rise  beyond  all  sects.” 

On  December  9,  1898,  the  Ramakrishna  Monastery  at  Belur  was  formally 


146 


Vivekananda 


consecrated  by  the  Swami  with  the  installation  of  the  Master’s  image  in  the 
chapel.  The  plot  of  land,  as  already  stated,  had  been  purchased  the  previous 
year  and  had  been  consecrated  with  proper  religious  ceremony  in  March  that 
year.  The  Swami  himself  had  performed  the  worship  on  that  occasion  and  after¬ 
wards  had  carried  on  his  shoulder  the  copper  vessel  containing  the  Master’s 
sacred  relics.  While  bearing  it  he  said  to  a  disciple:  “The  Master  once  told 
me,  'I  will  go  and  live  wherever  you  take  me,  carrying  me  on  your  shoulder,  be 
it  under  a  tree  or  in  the  humblest  cottage.’  With  faith  in  that  gracious  promise 
I  myself  am  now  carrying  him  to  the  site  of  our  future  Math.  Know  for  certain, 
my  boy,  that  so  long  as  his  name  inspires  his  followers  with  the  ideal  of  purity, 
holiness,  and  charity  for  all  men,  even  so  long  shall  he,  the  Master,  sanctify 
this  place  with  his  presence.” 

Of  the  glorious  future  he  saw  for  the  monastery  the  Swami  said:  “It  will 
be  a  centre  in  which  will  be  recognized  and  practised  a  grand  harmony  of  all 
creeds  and  faiths  as  exemplified  in  the  life  of  Sri  Ramakrishna,  and  religion  in 
its  universal  aspect,  alone,  will  be  preached.  And  from  this  centre  of  universal 
toleration  will  go  forth  the  shining  message  of  goodwill,  peace,  and  har¬ 
mony  to  deluge  the  whole  world.”  He  warned  all  of  the  danger  of  sectarianism’s 
creeping  in  if  they  became  careless. 

After  the  ceremony,  he  addressed  the  assembled  monks,  brahmacharins,  and 
lay  devotees  as  follows:  “Do  you  all,  my  brothers,  pray  to  the  Lord  with  all 
your  heart  and  soul  that  He,  the  Divine  Incarnation  of  the  age,  may  bless  this 
place  with  his  hallowed  presence  for  ever  and  ever,  and  make  it  a  unique  centre, 
a  holy  land,  of  harmony  of  different  religions  and  sects,  for  the  good  of  the 
many,  for  the  happiness  of  the  many.” 

Swami  Vivekananda  was  in  an  ecstatic  mood.  He  had  accomplished  the  great 
task  of  finding  a  permanent  place  on  which  to  build  a  temple  for  the  Master, 
with  a  monastery  for  his  brother  disciples  and  the  monks  of  the  future  that 
should  serve  as  the  headquarters  of  the  Ramakrishna  Order  for  the  propagation 
of  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  teachings.  He  felt  as  if  the  heavy  responsibility  that  he 
had  carried  on  his  shoulders  for  the  past  twelve  years  had  been  lifted.  He  wanted 
the  monastery  at  Belur  to  be  a  finished  university  where  Indian  mystical  wisdom 
and  Western  practical  science  would  be  taught  side  by  side.  And  he  spoke 
of  the  threefold  activities  of  the  monastery:  annadana,  the  gift  of  food; 
vidyadana,  the  gift  of  intellectual  knowledge;  and  jnanadana,  the  gift  of  spiritual 
wisdom.  These  three,  properly  balanced,  would,  in  the  Swami’s  opinion,  make 
a  complete  man.  The  brahmacharins  of  the  monastery,  through  unselfish  service 
of  men,  would  purify  their  minds  and  thus  qualify  themselves  for  the  supreme 
knowledge  of  Brahman. 

Swami  Vivekananda  in  his  vivid  imagination  saw  the  different  sections  of  the 
monastery  allotted  to  different  functions — the  free  kitchen  for  the  distribution 
of  food  to  the  hungry,  the  university  for  the  imparting  of  knowledge,  the  quar¬ 
ters  for  devotees  from  Europe  and  America,  and  so  forth  and  so  on.  The  spiritual 
ideals  emanating  from  the  Belur  Math,  he  said,  would  influence  the  thought- 
currents  of  the  world  for  eleven  hundred  years. 

“All  these  visions  are  rising  before  me” — these  were  his  very  words. 

It  was  a  few  months  before  the  buildings  of  the  new  monastery  were  com- 


Miss  J.  MacLeod  Mrs.  Ole  Bull  Vivekananda  Sister  Nivedita 

(Photograph  taken  in  India,  1898) 


T  RIGUNA'l  ITANANDA  SHIVANANDA  T  URIYANANDA 

VlVEKANANDA  BrAHMANANDA 

Sadananda 


Vivekananda 


147 


pleted  and  the  monastery  was  finally  removed  to  its  present  site.  The  date  of 
the  momentous  occasion  was  January  2,  1899.  The  Bengali  monthly  magazine, 
the  Udbodhan ,  was  first  published  on  January  4  of  the  same  year,  and  regarding 
its  policy,  the  Swami  declared  that  nothing  but  positive  ideas  for  the  physical, 
mental,  and  spiritual  improvement  of  the  race  should  find  a  place  in  it;  that 
instead  of  criticizing  the  thoughts  and  aspirations  of  ancient  and  modern  man, 
as  embodied  in  literature,  philosophy,  poetry,  and  the  arts,  the  magazine  should 
indicate  the  way  in  which  those  thoughts  and  aspirations  might  be  made  con¬ 
ducive  to  progress;  and  finally  that  the  magazine  should  stand  for  universal 
harmony  as  preached  by  Sri  Ramakrishna,  and  disseminate  his  ideals  of  love, 
purity,  and  renunciation. 

The  Swami  was  happy  to  watch  the  steady  expansion  of  the  varied  activities 
of  the  Order.  At  his  request  Swami  Saradananda  had  returned  from  America  to 
assist  in  the  organization  of  the  Belur  Math.  Together  with  Swami  Turiyananda, 
he  conducted  regular  classes  at  the  Math  for  the  study  of  Sanskrit  and  of  Eastern 
and  Western  philosophy.  Somewhat  later  the  two  Swamis  were  sent  on  a  preach¬ 
ing  mission  to  Gujrat,  in  Western  India,  and  for  the  same  purpose  two  of  the 
Swami’s  own  disciples  were  sent  to  East  Bengal.  Swami  Shivananda  was  deputed 
to  Ceylon  to  preach  Vedanta.  Reports  of  the  excellent  work  done  by  Swamis 
Ramakrishnananda  and  Abhedananda  in  Madras  and  America  were  received 
at  the  Math.  Swami  Akhandananda’s  work  for  the  educational  uplift  of  the 
villages  and  also  in  establishing  homes  for  the  orphans  elicited  praise  from 
the  Government. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  institutions  founded  by  Swami  Vivekananda  was 
the  Advaita  Asrama  at  Mayavati  in  the  Himalayas.  Ever  since  his  visit  to  the 
Alps  in  Switzerland,  the  Swami  had  been  cherishing  the  desire  to  establish 
a  monastery  in  the  solitude  of  the  Himalayas  where  non-dualism  would  be 
taught  and  practised  in  its  purest  form.  Captain  and  Mrs.  Sevier  took  up  the 
idea,  and  the  Asrama  was  established  at  Mayavati,  at  an  altitude  of  6800  feet. 
Before  it  there  shone,  day  and  night,  the  eternal  snow-range  of  the  Himalayas 
for  an  extent  of  over  six  hundred  miles,  with  Nanda  Devi  rising  to  a  height 
of  25,500  feet. 

Spiritual  seekers,  irrespective  of  creed  and  race,  were  welcome  at  the  monastery 
at  Mayavati.  No  external  worship  of  any  kind  was  permitted  within  its  bound¬ 
aries.  Even  the  formal  worship  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  was  excluded.  It  was  required 
of  the  inmates  and  guests  always  to  keep  before  their  minds  the  vision  of  the 
nameless  and  formless  Spirit. 

Swami  Vivekananda  in  the  following  lines  laid  down  the  ideals  and  principles 
of  this  Himalayan  asrama: 

“In  Whom  is  the  Universe,  Who  is  in  the  Universe,  Who  is  the  Universe; 
in  Whom  is  the  Soul,  Who  is  in  the  Soul,  Who  is  the  Soul  of  man;  to  know 
Him,  and  therefore  the  Universe,  as  our  Self,  alone  extinguishes  all  fear,  brings 
an  end  to  misery,  and  leads  to  infinite  freedom.  Wherever  there  has  been 
expansion  in  love  or  progress  in  well-being  of  individuals  or  numbers,  it  has  been 
through  the  perception,  realization,  and  the  practicalization  of  the  Eternal 
Truth — the  Oneness  of  All  Beings.  'Dependence  is  misery.  Independence  is 
happiness/  The  Advaita  is  the  only  system  which  gives  unto  man  complete 


Vivekananda 


148 

possession  of  himself  and  takes  off  all  dependence  and  its  associated  supersti¬ 
tions,  thus  making  us  brave  to  suffer,  brave  to  do,  and  in  the  long  run  to  attain 
to  Absolute  Freedom. 

“Hitherto  it  has  not  been  possible  to  preach  this  Noble  Truth  entirely  free 
from  the  settings  of  dualistic  weakness;  this  alone,  we  are  convinced,  explains 
why  it  has  not  been  more  operative  and  useful  to  mankind  at  large. 

“To  give  this  one  truth  a  freer  and  fuller  scope  in  elevating  the  lives  of 
individuals  and  leavening  the  mass  of  mankind,  we  start  this  Advaita  Asrama 
on  the  Himalayan  heights,  the  land  of  its  first  formulation. 

“Here  it  is  hoped  to  keep  Advaita  free  from  all  superstitions  and  weakening 
contaminations.  Here  will  be  taught  and  practised  nothing  but  the  Doctrine 
of  Unity,  pure  and  simple;  and  though  in  entire  sympathy  with  all  other  sys¬ 
tems,  this  Asrama  is  dedicated  to  Advaita  and  Advaita  alone.” 

After  the  Swami’s  return  from  Kashmir  his  health  had  begun  to  deteriorate 
visibly.  His  asthma  caused  him  great  suffering.  But  his  zeal  for  work  increased 
many  times. 

“Ever  since  I  went  to  Amarnath,”  he  said  one  day,  “Siva  Himself  has  entered 
into  my  brain.  He  will  not  go.” 

At  the  earnest  request  of  the  brother  monks,  he  visited  Calcutta  frequently 
for  treatment;  yet  even  there  he  had  no  respite  from  work.  Visitors  thronged 
about  him  for  religious  instruction  from  morning  till  night,  and  his  large  heart 
could  not  say  no  to  them.  When  the  brother  monks  pressed  him  to  receive 
people  only  at  appointed  hours,  he  replied:  “They  take  so  much  trouble  to 
come,  walking  all  the  way  from  their  homes,  and  can  I,  sitting  here,  not  speak  a 
few  words  to  them,  merely  because  I  risk  my  health  a  little?” 

His  words  sounded  so  much  like  those  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  during  the  latter’s 
critical  illness,  no  wonder  that  Swami  Premananda  said  to  him  one  day,  “We 
do  not  see  any  difference  between  Sri  Ramakrishna  and  you.” 

But  the  Swami’s  greatest  concern  was  the  training  of  the  sannyasins  and 
brahmacharins — the  future  bearers  of  his  message — and  to  this  task  he  addressed 
himself  with  all  his  soul.  He  encouraged  them  in  their  meditation  and  manual 
work,  himself  setting  the  example.  Sometimes  he  would  cook  for  them,  some¬ 
times  knead  bread,  till  the  garden,  or  dig  a  well.  Again,  he  would  train  them  to 
be  preachers  by  asking  them  to  speak  before  a  gathering  without  preparation. 
Constantly  he  reminded  the  monks  of  their  monastic  vows,  especially  chastity 
and  renunciation,  without  which  deep  spiritual  perception  was  impossible. 
He  attached  great  importance  to  physical  exercise  and  said:  “I  want  sappers 
and  miners  in  the  army  of  religion!  So,  boys,  set  yourselves  to  the  task  of 
training  your  muscles!  For  ascetics,  mortification  is  all  right.  For  workers,  well 
developed  bodies,  muscles  of  iron  and  nerves  of  steel!”  He  urged  them  to 
practise  austerities  and  meditation  in  solitude.  For  the  beginners  he  laid  down 
strict  rules  about  food.  They  were  to  rise  early,  meditate,  and  perform  their 
religious  duties  scrupulously.  Health  must  not  be  neglected  and  the  company 
of  worldly  people  should  be  avoided.  But  above  all,  he  constantly  admonished 
them  to  give  up  idleness  in  any  shape  or  form. 

Of  himself  he  said:  “No  rest  for  me!  I  shall  die  in  harness!  I  love  action!  Life 


Vivekananda  149 

is  a  battle,  and  one  must  always  be  in  action,  to  use  a  military  phrase.  Let  me 
live  and  die  in  action!”  He  was  a  living  hymn  of  work. 

To  a  disciple  who  wanted  to  remain  absorbed  in  the  Brahman  of  Vedanta, 
the  Swami  thundered:  “Why?  What  is  the  use  of  remaining  always  stupefied 
in  samadhi?  Under  the  inspiration  of  non-dualism  why  not  sometimes  dance 
like  Siva,  and  sometimes  remain  immersed  in  superconsciousness?  Who  enjoys 
a  delicacy  more — he  who  eats  it  all  by  himself,  or  he  who  shares  it  with  others? 
Granted,  by  realizing  Atman  in  meditation  you  attain  mukti;  but  of  what  use 
is  that  to  the  world?  We  have  to  take  the  whole  world  with  us  to  mukti.  We 
shall  set  a  conflagration  in  the  domain  of  great  Maya.  Then  only  will  you  be 
established  in  the  Eternal  Truth.  Oh,  what  can  compare  with  that  Bliss 
immeasurable,  ‘infinite  as  the  skies’!  In  that  state  you  will  be  speechless, 
carried  beyond  yourself,  by  seeing  your  own  Self  in  every  being  that  breathes, 
and  in  every  atom  of  the  universe.  When  you  realize  this,  you  cannot  live  in 
this  world  without  treating  everyone  with  exceeding  love  and  compassion.  This 
is  indeed  practical  Vedanta.” 

He  wanted  his  disciples  to  perform  with  accuracy  and  diligence  the  every¬ 
day  tasks  of  life.  “He  who  knows  even  how  to  prepare  a  smoke  properly,  knows 
also  how  to  meditate.  And  he  who  cannot  cook  well  cannot  be  a  perfect 
sannyasin.  Unless  cooking  is  performed  with  a  pure  mind  and  concentration, 
the  food  is  not  palatable.” 

Work  cannot  produce  real  fruit  without  detachment  on  the  part  of  the 
worker.  “Only  a  great  monk,”  the  Swami  said  one  day,  “can  be  a  great  worker; 
for  he  is  without  attachment.  .  .  .  There  are  no  greater  workers  than  Buddha  and 
Christ.  No  work  is  secular.  All  work  is  adoration  and  worship.” 

The  first  duty  of  the  inmates  of  the  monastery  was  renunciation.  How  the 
Swami  idolized  the  monastic  life!  “Never  forget,  service  to  the  world  and  the 
realization  of  God  are  the  ideals  of  the  monk!  Stick  to  them!  The  monastic  is 
the  most  immediate  of  the  paths.  Between  the  monk  and  his  God  there  are  no 
idols!  ‘The  sannyasin  stands  on  the  head  of  the  Vedas!’  declare  the  Vedas, 
for  he  is  free  from  churches  and  sects  and  religions  and  prophets  and  scriptures. 
He  is  the  visible  God  on  earth.  Remember  this,  and  go  thou  thy  way,  sannyasin 
bold,  carrying  the  banner  of  renunciation — the  banner  of  peace,  of  freedom, 
of  blessedness!” 

To  a  disciple  who  wanted  to  practise  spiritual  discipline  to  attain  his  own 
salvation,  the  Swami  said:  “You  will  go  to  hell  if  you  seek  your  own  salvation! 
Seek  the  salvation  of  others  if  you  want  to  reach  the  Highest.  Kill  out  the  desire 
for  personal  mukti.  This  is  the  greatest  spiritual  discipline.  Work,  my  children, 
work  with  your  whole  heart  and  soul!  That  is  the  thing.  Mind  not  the  fruit 
of  work.  What  if  you  go  to  hell  working  for  others?  That  is  worth  more  than 
to  gain  heaven  by  seeking  your  own  salvation.  ...  Sri  Ramakrishna  came  and 
gave  his  life  for  the  world.  I  will  also  sacrifice  my  life.  You  also,  every  one  of 
you,  should  do  the  same.  All  these  works  and  so  forth  are  only  a  beginning. 
Believe  me,  from  the  shedding  of  our  lifeblood  will  arise  gigantic,  heroic  workers 
and  warriors  of  God  who  will  revolutionize  the  whole  world.” 

He  wanted  his  disciples  to  be  all-round  men.  “You  must  try  to  combine  in 
your  life  immense  idealism  with  immense  practicality.  You  must  be  prepared 


Vivekananda 


150 

to  go  into  deep  meditation  now,  and  the  next  moment  you  must  be  ready 
to  go  and  cultivate  the  fields.  You  must  be  prepared  to  explain  the  intricacies 
of  the  scriptures  now,  and  the  next  moment  to  go  and  sell  the  produce  of  the 
fields  in  the  market.  .  .  .  The  true  man  is  he  who  is  strong  as  strength  itself 
and  yet  possesses  a  woman’s  heart.” 

He  spoke  of  the  power  of  faith:  “The  history  of  the  world  is  the  history 
of  a  few  men  who  had  faith  in  themselves.  That  faith  calls  out  the  inner  divinity. 
You  can  do  anything.  You  fail  only  when  you  do  not  strive  sufficiently  to  mani¬ 
fest  infinite  power.  As  soon  as  a  man  loses  faith  in  himself,  death  comes.  Believe 
first  in  yourself  and  then  in  God.  A  handful  of  strong  men  will  move  the  world. 
We  need  a  heart  to  feel,  a  brain  to  conceive,  and  a  strong  arm  to  do  the 
work.  .  .  .  One  man  contains  within  him  the  whole  universe.  One  particle  of 
matter  has  all  the  energy  of  the  universe  at  its  back.  In  a  conflict  between  the 
heart  and  the  brain,  follow  your  heart.” 

7  J 

“His  words,”  writes  Romain  Rolland,  “are  great  music,  phrases  in  the  style 
of  Beethoven,  stirring  rhythms  like  the  march  of  Handel  choruses.  I  cannot 
touch  these  sayings  of  his,  scattered  as  they  are  through  the  pages  of  books 
at  thirty  years’  distance,  without  receiving  a  thrill  through  my  body  like  an 
electric  shock.  And  what  shocks,  what  transports  must  have  been  produced 
when  in  burning  words  they  issued  from  the  lips  of  the  hero!” 

The  Swami  felt  he  was  dying.  But  he  said:  “Let  me  die  fighting.  Two  years 
of  physical  suffering  have  taken  from  me  twenty  years  of  life.  But  the  soul 
changes  not,  does  it?  It  is  there,  the  same  madcap — Atman — mad  upon  one 
idea,  intent  and  intense.” 

SECOND  VISIT  TO  AMERICA 

On  December  16,  1898,  Swami  Vivekananda  announced  his  plan  to  go  to  the 
West  to  inspect  the  work  he  had  founded  and  to  fan  the  flame.  The  devotees 
and  friends  welcomed  the  idea  since  they  thought  the  sea  voyage  would  restore 
his  failing  health.  He  planned  to  take  with  him  Sister  Nivedita  and  Swami 
Turiyananda. 

Versed  in  the  scriptures,  Turiyananda  had  spent  most  of  his  life  in  medita¬ 
tion  and  was  averse  to  public  work.  Failing  to  persuade  him  by  words  to  accom¬ 
pany  him  to  America,  Vivekananda  put  his  arms  round  his  brother  disciple’s 
neck  and  wept  like  a  child,  saying:  “Dear  brother,  don’t  you  see  how  I  am  laying 
down  my  life  inch  by  inch  in  fulfilling  the  mission  of  my  Master?  Now  I  have 
come  to  the  verge  of  death!  Can  you  look  on  without  trying  to  relieve  part 
of  my  great  burden?” 

Swami  Turiyananda  was  deeply  moved  and  offered  to  follow  the  Swami 
wherever  he  wanted  to  go.  When  he  asked  if  he  should  take  with  him  some 
Vedanta  scriptures,  Vivekananda  said:  “Oh,  they  have  had  enough  of  learn¬ 
ing  and  books!  The  last  time  they  saw  a  warrior;32  now  I  want  to  show  them  a 
brahmin.” 

June  20,  1899,  was  fixed  as  their  date  of  sailing  from  Calcutta.  On  the  night 
of  the  19th  a  meeting  was  held  at  the  Belur  Math  at  which  the  junior  members 

32  Referring  to  himself,  who  had  delivered  his  message  in  a  combative  spirit. 


Vivekananda  151 

of  the  monastery  presented  addresses  to  the  two  Swamis.  The  next  day  the 
Holy  Mother  entertained  them  and  other  monks  with  a  sumptuous  feast. 

The  steamship  “Golconda,”  carrying  the  Swami  and  his  two  companions, 
touched  Madras,  but  the  passengers  were  not  allowed  to  land  on  account  of  the 
plague  in  Calcutta.  This  was  a  great  disappointment  to  Swami  Vivekananda’s 
South  Indian  friends.  The  ship  continued  to  Colombo,  Aden,  Naples,  and 
Marseilles,  finally  arriving  in  London  on  July  31. 

The  voyage  in  the  company  of  the  Swami  was  an  education  for  Turiyananda 
and  Nivedita.  From  beginning  to  end  a  vivid  flow  of  thought  and  stories  went 
on.  One  never  knew  what  moment  would  bring  the  flash  of  intuition  and  the 
ringing  utterance  of  some  fresh  truth.  That  encyclopaedic  mind  touched  all 
subjects:  Christ,  Buddha,  Krishna,  Ramakrishna,  folklore,  the  history  of  India 
and  Europe,  the  degradation  of  Hindu  society  and  the  assurance  of  its  coming 
greatness,  different  philosophical  and  religious  systems,  and  many  themes  more. 
All  was  later  admirably  recorded  by  Sister  Nivedita  in  The  Master  as  I  Saw  Him, 
from  which  the  following  fragments  may  be  cited. 

“Yes,”  the  Swami  said  one  day,  “the  older  I  grow,  the  more  everything  seems 
to  me  to  lie  in  manliness.  This  is  my  new  gospel.  Do  even  evil  like  a  man!  Be 
wicked,  if  you  must,  on  a  grand  scale!”  Some  time  before,  Nivedita  had  com¬ 
plimented  India  on  the  infrequency  of  crime;  on  that  occasion  the  Swami  said 
in  sorrowful  protest:  “Would  to  God  it  were  otherwise  in  my  land!  For  this  is 
verily  the  virtuousness  of  death.”  Evidently,  according  to  him,  the  vilest  crime 
was  not  to  act,  to  do  nothing  at  all. 

Regarding  conservative  and  liberal  ideas  he  said:  “The  conservative’s  whole 
ideal  is  submission.  Your  ideal  is  struggle.  Consequently  it  is  we  who  enjoy  life, 
and  never  you!  You  are  always  striving  to  change  yours  to  something  better, 
and  before  a  millionth  part  of  the  change  is  carried  out,  you  die.  The  Western 
ideal  is  to  be  doing,  the  Eastern,  to  be  suffering.  The  perfect  life  would  be  a 
wonderful  harmony  between  doing  and  suffering.  But  that  can  never  be.” 

To  him  selfishness  was  the  greatest  barrier  to  spiritual  progress: 

“It  is  selfishness  that  we  must  seek  to  eliminate.  I  find  that  whenever  I  have 
made  a  mistake  in  my  life,  it  has  always  been  because  self  entered  into  the 
calculation.  Where  self  has  not  been  involved,  my  judgement  has  gone  straight 
to  the  mark.” 

“You  are  quite  wrong,”  he  said  again,  “when  you  think  that  fighting  is  the 
sign  of  growth.  It  is  not  so  at  all.  Absorption  is  the  sign.  Hinduism  is  the  very 
genius  of  absorption.  We  have  never  cared  for  fighting.  Of  course,  we  struck 
a  blow  now  and  then  in  defense  of  our  homes.  That  was  right.  But  we  never 
cared  for  fighting  for  its  own  sake.  Everyone  had  to  learn  that.  So  let  these  races 
of  new-comers  whirl  on!  They  all  will  be  taken  into  Hinduism  in  the  end.” 

In  another  mood,  the  theme  of  his  conversation  would  be  Kali,  and  the  wor¬ 
ship  of  the  Terrible.  Then  he  would  say:  “I  love  terror  for  its  own  sake,  despair 
for  its  own  sake,  misery  for  its  own  sake.  Fight  always.  Fight  and  fight  on,  though 
always  in  defeat.  That’s  the  ideal!  That’s  the  ideal!”  Again:  “Worship  the 
Terrible!  Worship  Death!  All  else  is  vain.  All  struggle  is  vain.  This  is  the  last 
lesson.  Yet  this  is  not  the  coward’s  love  of  death,  not  the  love  of  the  weak  or 
the  suicide.  It  is  the  welcome  of  the  strong  man,  who  has  sounded  everything 


Vivekananda 


152 

to  the  depths  and  knows  that  there  is  no  alternative.”  And  who  is  Kali,  whose 
will  is  irresistible?  ‘‘The  totality  of  all  souls,  not  the  human  alone,  is  the  Per¬ 
sonal  God.  The  will  of  the  totality  nothing  can  resist.  It  is  what  we  know  as 
Law.  And  this  is  what  we  mean  by  Siva  and  Kali  and  so  on.” 

Concerning  true  greatness:  “As  I  grow  older  I  find  that  I  look  more  and  more 
for  greatness  in  little  things.  I  want  to  know  what  a  great  man  eats  and  wears, 
and  how  he  speaks  to  his  servants.  I  want  to  find  a  Sir  Philip  Sidney  greatness. 
Few  men  would  remember  to  think  of  others  in  the  moment  of  death. 

“But  anyone  will  be  great  in  a  great  position!  Even  the  coward  will  grow 
brave  in  the  glow  of  the  footlights.  The  world  looks  on.  Whose  heart  will  not 
throb?  Whose  pulse  will  not  quicken,  till  he  can  do  his  best?  More  and  more 
the  true  greatness  seems  to  me  that  of  the  worm,  doing  its  duty  silently,  steadily, 
from  moment  to  moment  and  hour  to  hour.” 

Regarding  the  points  of  difference  between  his  own  schemes  for  the  regenera¬ 
tion  of  India  and  those  preached  by  others:  “I  disagree  with  those  who  are  for 
giving  their  superstitions  back  to  my  people.  Like  the  Egyptologist’s  interest  in 
Egypt,  it  is  easy  to  feel  an  interest  in  India  that  is  purely  selfish.  One  may  desire 
to  see  again  the  India  of  one’s  books,  one’s  studies,  one’s  dreams.  My  hope  is  to 
see  the  strong  points  of  that  India,  reinforced  by  the  strong  points  of  this  age, 
only  in  a  natural  way.  The  new  state  of  things  must  be  a  growth  from  within. 
So  I  preach  only  the  Upanishads.  If  you  look  you  will  find  that  I  have  never 
quoted  anything  but  the  Upanishads.  And  of  the  Upanishads,  it  is  only  that  one 
idea — strength.  The  quintessence  of  the  Vedas  and  Vedanta  and  all,  lies  in 
that  one  word.  Buddha’s  teaching  was  of  non-resistance  or  non-injury.  But  I 
think  ours  is  a  better  way  of  teaching  the  same  thing.  For  behind  that  non¬ 
injury  lay  a  dreadful  weakness — the  weakness  that  conceives  the  idea  of  resist¬ 
ance.  But  I  do  not  think  of  punishing  or  escaping  from  a  drop  of  sea-spray.  It  is 
nothing  to  me.  Yet  to  the  mosquito  it  would  be  serious.  Now,  I  will  make 
all  injury  like  that.  Strength  and  fearlessness.  My  own  ideal  is  that  giant  of  a 
saint  whom  they  killed  in  the  Sepoy  Mutiny,  and  who  broke  his  silence,  when 
stabbed  to  the  heart,  to  say — ‘And  thou  also  art  He.’  ” 

About  India  and  Europe  the  Swami  said:  “I  see  that  India  is  a  young  and 
living  organism.  Europe  is  also  young  and  living.  Neither  has  arrived  at  such  a 
stage  of  development  that  we  can  safely  criticize  its  institutions.  They  are  two 
great  experiments,  neither  of  which  is  yet  complete.”  They  ought  to  be  mutually 
helpful,  he  went  on,  but  at  the  same  time  each  should  respect  the  free  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  other.  They  ought  to  grow  hand  in  hand. 

Thus  time  passed  till  the  boat  arrived  at  Tilbury  Dock,  where  the  party  was 
met  by  the  Swami’s  disciples  and  friends,  among  whom  were  two  American 
ladies  who  had  come  all  the  way  to  London  to  meet  their  teacher.  It  was  the 
off-season  for  London,  and  so  the  two  Swamis  sailed  for  New  York  on  August  16. 

The  trip  was  beneficial  to  the  Swami’s  health;  the  sea  was  smooth  and  at 
night  the  moonlight  was  enchanting.  One  evening  as  the  Swami  paced  up  and 
down  the  deck  enjoying  the  beauty  of  nature,  he  suddenly  exclaimed,  “And  if 
all  this  maya  is  so  beautiful,  think  of  the  wondrous  beauty  of  the  Reality  behind 
it!”  Another  evening,  when  the  moon  was  full,  he  pointed  to  the  sea  and  sky, 
and  said,  “Why  recite  poetry  when  there  is  the  very  essence  of  poetry?” 


Vivekananda 


153 


The  afternoon  that  Swami  Vivekananda  arrived  in  New  York,  he  and  his 
brother  disciple  went  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Leggett  to  the  latter’s  country  home, 
Ridgely  Manor,  at  Stone  Ridge  in  the  Catskill  Mountains,  Swami  Abhedananda 
being  at  that  time  absent  from  New  York  on  a  lecture  tour.  A  month  later 
Nivedita  came  to  Ridgely,  and  on  September  21,  when  she  decided  to  assume 
the  nun’s  garb,  the  Swami  wrote  for  her  his  beautiful  poem  “Peace.”  The  rest 
and  good  climate  were  improving  his  health,  and  he  was  entertaining  all  with 
his  usual  fun  and  merriment. 

One  day  Miss  MacLeod  asked  him  how  he  liked  their  home-grown  straw¬ 
berries,  and  he  answered  that  he  had  not  tasted  any.  Miss  MacLeod  was  sur¬ 
prised  and  said,  “Why  Swami,  we  have  been  serving  you  strawberries  with  cream 
and  sugar  every  day  for  the  past  week.”  “Ah,”  the  Swami  replied,  with  a  mis¬ 
chievous  twinkle  in  his  eyes,  “I  am  tasting  only  cream  and  sugar.  Even  tacks 
taste  sweet  that  way.” 

In  November  the  Swami  returned  to  New  York  and  was  greeted  by  his  old 
friends  and  disciples.  He  was  pleased  to  see  how  the  work  had  expanded  under 
the  able  guidance  of  Swami  Abhedananda.  Swami  Vivekananda  gave  some  talks 
and  conducted  classes. 

At  one  of  the  public  meetings  in  New  York,  after  addressing  a  tense  audience 
for  about  fifteen  minutes,  the  Swami  suddenly  made  a  formal  bow  and  retired. 
The  meeting  broke  up  and  the  people  went  away  greatly  disappointed.  A  friend 
asked  him,  when  he  was  returning  home,  why  he  had  cut  short  the  lecture 
in  that  manner,  just  when  both  he  and  the  audience  were  warming  up.  Had  he 
forgotten  his  points?  Had  he  become  nervous?  The  Swami  answered  that  at 
the  meeting  he  had  felt  that  he  had  too  much  power.  He  had  noticed  that  the 
members  of  the  audience  were  becoming  so  absorbed  in  his  ideas  that  they 
were  losing  their  own  individualities.  Pie  had  felt  that  they  had  become  like 
soft  clay  and  that  he  could  give  them  any  shape  he  wanted.  That,  however, 
was  contrary  to  his  philosophy.  He  wished  every  man  and  woman  to  grow 
according  to  his  or  her  own  inner  law.  He  did  not  wish  to  change  or  destroy 
anyone’s  individuality.  That  was  why  he  had  had  to  stop. 

Swami  Turiyananda  took  up  his  work  at  Montclair,  New  Jersey,  a  short 
distance  from  New  York,  and  began  to  teach  children  the  stories  and  folklore 
of  India.  He  also  lectured  regularly  at  the  Vedanta  Society  of  New  York.  His 
paper  on  Sankaracharya,  read  before  the  Cambridge  Conference,  was  highly 
praised  by  the  Harvard  professors. 

One  day,  while  the  Swami  was  staying  at  Ridgely  Manor,  Miss  MacLeod  had 
received  a  telegram  informing  her  that  her  only  brother  was  dangerously  ill  in 
Los  Angeles.  As  she  was  leaving  for  the  West  coast,  the  Swami  uttered  a  Sanskrit 
benediction  and  told  her  that  he  would  soon  meet  her  there.  She  proceeded 
straight  to  the  home  of  Mrs.  S.  K.  Blodgett,  where  her  brother  was  staying,  and 
after  spending  a  few  minutes  with  the  patient,  asked  Mrs.  Blodgett  whether 
her  brother  might  be  permitted  to  die  in  the  room  in  which  he  was  then  lying; 
for  she  had  found  a  large  picture  of  Vivekananda,  hanging  on  the  wall  at  the 
foot  of  the  patient’s  bed.  Miss  MacLeod  told  her  hostess  of  her  surprise  on 
seeing  the  picture,  and  Mrs.  Blodgett  replied  that  she  had  heard  Vivekananda 
at  the  Parliament  of  Religions  in  Chicago  and  thought  that  if  ever  there  was  a 


Vivekananda 


154 

God  on  earth,  it  was  that  man.33  Miss  MacLeod  told  her  that  she  had  just  left 
the  Swami  at  Ridgely  Manor,  and  further,  that  he  had  expressed  the  desire  to 
come  to  Los  Angeles.  The  brother  died  within  a  few  days,  and  the  Swami 
started  for  the  West  Coast  on  November  22.  He  broke  his  trip  in  Chicago  to 
visit  his  old  friends,  and  upon  his  arrival  in  Los  Angeles  became  the  guest  of  Mrs. 
Blodgett,  whom  he  described  in  a  letter  to  Mary  Hale  as  “fat,  old,  extremely 
witty,  and  very  motherly.” 

The  impression  the  Swami  left  in  the  mind  of  this  good  woman  can  be 
gathered  from  the  following  lines  of  a  letter  written  by  her  to  Miss  MacLeod 
after  Swami  ji’s  passing  away: 

I  am  ever  recalling  those  swift,  bright  days  in  that  never-to-be-forgotten  winter,  lived 
in  simple  freedom  and  kindliness.  We  could  not  choose  but  to  be  happy  and  good.  .  .  . 

I  knew  him  personally  but  a  short  time,  yet  in  that  time  I  could  see  in  a  hundred  ways 
the  child  side  of  Swamiji's  character,  which  was  a  constant  appeal  to  the  mother  quality 
in  all  good  women.  .  .  .  He  would  come  home  from  a  lecture,  where  he  had  been  com¬ 
pelled  to  break  away  from  his  audience — so  eagerly  would  they  gather  around  him — and 
rush  into  the  kitchen  like  a  boy  released  from  school,  with  “Now  we  will  cook!” 
Presently  Joe  would  appear  and  discover  the  culprit  among  the  pots  and  pans,  and  in 
his  fine  dress,  who  was  by  thrifty,  watchful  Joe  admonished  to  change  to  his  home 
garments.  ...  In  the  homely,  old-fashioned  kitchen,  you  and  I  have  seen  Swamiji  at 
his  best. 

Swami  Vivekananda  gave  many  lectures  before  large  audiences  in  Los 
Angeles  and  Pasadena;  but  alas!  there  was  no  Goodwin  to  record  them,  and  most 
of  what  he  said  was  consequently  lost.  Only  a  little  has  been  preserved  in  the 
fragmentary  notes  of  his  disciples. 

At  the  Universalist  Church  of  Pasadena  he  gave  his  famous  lecture  “Christ, 
the  Messenger”;  and  this  was  the  only  time,  Miss  MacLeod  said  later,  that  she 
saw  him  enveloped  in  a  halo.  The  Swami,  after  the  lecture,  was  returning  home 
wrapped  in  thought,  and  Miss  MacLeod  was  following  at  a  little  distance,  when 
suddenly  she  heard  him  say,  “I  know  it,  I  know  it!” 

“What  do  you  know?”  asked  Miss  MacLeod. 

“How  they  make  it.” 

“How  they  make  what?” 

“Mulligatawny  soup.  They  put  in  a  dash  of  bay  leaf  for  flavour.”  And  then 
he  burst  into  a  laugh. 

The  Swami  spent  about  a  month  at  the  headquarters  of  the  “Home  of  Truth” 
in  Los  Angeles,  conducted  regular  classes,  and  gave  several  public  lectures,  each 
of  which  was  attended  by  over  a  thousand  people.  He  spoke  many  times  on 
the  different  aspects  of  raja-yoga,  a  subject  in  which  Californians  seemed  to  be 
especially  interested. 

The  Swami  endeared  himself  to  the  members  of  the  Home  of  Truth  by 
his  simple  manner,  his  great  intellect,  and  his  spiritual  wisdom.  Unity,  the  maga¬ 
zine  of  the  organization,  said  of  him:  “There  is  a  combination  in  the  Swami 
Vivekananda  of  the  learning  of  a  university  president,  the  dignity  of  an  arch¬ 
bishop,  with  the  grace  and  winsomeness  of  a  free  and  natural  child.  Getting 


83  See  p.  62. 


Vivekananda 


155 


upon  the  platform,  without  a  moment’s  preparation,  he  would  soon  be  in  the 
midst  of  his  subject,  sometimes  becoming  almost  tragic  as  his  mind  would 
wander  from  deep  metaphysics  to  the  prevailing  conditions  in  Christian  coun¬ 
tries  of  today,  whose  people  go  and  seek  to  reform  the  Filipinos  with  the  sword 
in  one  hand  and  the  Bible  in  the  other,  or  in  South  Africa  allow  children  of 
the  same  Father  to  cut  each  other  to  pieces.  In  contrast  to  this  condition  of 
things,  he  described  what  took  place  during  the  last  great  famine  in  India, 
where  men  would  die  of  starvation  beside  their  cows  rather  than  stretch  forth 
a  hand  to  kill.” 

The  members  of  the  Home  of  Truth  were  not  permitted  to  smoke.  One 
evening  the  Swami  was  invited  for  dinner  by  a  member  of  the  organization  along 
with  several  other  friends  who  were  all  opposed  to  the  use  of  tobacco.  After 
dinner  the  hostess  was  absent  from  the  room  for  a  few  minutds,  when  the 
Swami,  perhaps  due  to  his  ignorance  of  the  rule  about  tobacco,  took  out  his 
pipe,  filled  it  up,  and  began  to  puff.  The  guests  were  aghast,  but  kept  quiet. 
When  the  hostess  returned,  she  flew  into  a  rage  and  asked  the  Swami  if  God 
intended  men  to  smoke,  adding  that  in  that  case  He  would  have  furnished  the 
human  head  with  a  chimney  for  the  smoke  to  go  out. 

“But  He  has  given  us  the  brain  to  invent  a  pipe,”  the  Swami  said  with  a 
smile. 

Everybody  laughed,  and  the  Swami  was  given  freedom  to  smoke  while  living 
as  a  guest  in  the  Home  of  Truth. 

Swami  Vivekananda  journeyed  to  Oakland  as  the  guest  of  Dr.  Benjamin 
Fay  Mills,  the  minister  of  the  First  Unitarian  Church,  and  there  gave  eight 
lectures  to  crowded  audiences  which  often  numbered  as  high  as  two  thousand. 
He  also  gave  many  public  lectures  in  San  Francisco  and  Alameda.  People  had 
already  read  his  Raja-Yoga.  Impressed  by  his  lectures,  they  wanted  a  centre  in 
San  Francisco.  The  Swami  was  offered  a  gift  of  land,  measuring  a  hundred 
and  sixty  acres,  in  the  southern  part  of  the  San  Antone  valley;  surrounded  by 
forest  and  hills,  and  situated  at  an  altitude  of  2500  feet,  the  property  was  only 
twelve  miles  from  the  Lick  Observatory  on  Mt.  Hamilton.  He  at  once  thought 
of  Swami  Turiyananda,  who  could  be  given  charge  of  the  place  to  train  earnest 
students  in  meditation. 

During  his  trip  back  to  New  York,  across  the  American  continent,  the  Swami 
was  very  much  fatigued.  He  stopped  in  Chicago  and  Detroit  on  the  way.  In 
Chicago  he  was  the  guest  of  the  Hale  family,  and  many  old  reminiscences  were 
exchanged.  On  the  morning  of  his  departure,  Mary  came  to  the  Swami’s  room 
and  found  him  sad.  His  bed  appeared  to  have  been  untouched,  and  on  being 
asked  the  reason,  he  confessed  that  he  had  spent  the  whole  night  without 
sleep.  “Oh,”  he  said,  almost  in  a  whisper,  “it  is  so  difficult  to  break  human 
bonds!”  He  knew  that  this  was  the  last  time  he  was  to  visit  these  devoted 
friends. 

In  New  York  the  Swami  gave  a  few  lectures  at  the  Vedanta  Society,  which 
by  this  time  had  enlisted  the  active  co-operation  of  several  professors  of  Harvard 
and  Columbia  University.  At  the  earliest  opportunity  he  spoke  to  Turiyananda 
about  the  proposed  gift  of  land  in  northern  California,  but  the  latter  hesitated 


Vivekananda 


156 

to  accept  any  responsibility.  The  Swami  said,  “It  is  the  will  of  the  Mother 
that  you  should  take  charge  of  the  work  there.” 

Swami  Turiyananda  was  amused  and  said  with  good  humour:  “Rather  say 
it  is  your  will.  Certainly  you  have  not  heard  the  Mother  communicate  Her 
will  to  you  in  that  way.  How  can  you  hear  the  words  of  the  Mother?” 

“Yes,  brother,”  the  Swami  said  with  great  emotion.  “Yes,  the  words  of  the 
Mother  can  be  heard  as  clearly  as  we  hear  one  another.  But  one  requires  a  fine 
nerve  to  hear  Mother's  words.” 

Swami  Vivekananda  made  this  statement  with  such  fervour  that  his  brother 
disciple  felt  convinced  that  the  Divine  Mother  was  speaking  through  him.  He 
cheerfully  agreed,  therefore,  to  take  charge  of  Santi  Asrama,  the  Peace  Retreat, 
as  the  new  place  was  called. 

In  parting*,  the  Swami  said  to  Turiyananda:  “Go  and  establish  the  Asrama 
in  California.  Hoist  the  flag  of  Vedanta  there;  from  this  moment  destroy  even 
the  memory  of  India!  Above  all,  lead  the  life  and  Mother  will  see  to  the  rest.” 

The  Swami  visited  Detroit  again  for  a  week  and  on  July  20  sailed  for  Paris. 

GLIMPSES  OF  THE  SWAMl’s  MIND 

Before  continuing  the  thread  of  Swami  Vivekananda’s  life,  it  will  be  interest¬ 
ing  for  the  reader  to  get  a  glimpse  of  his  state  of  mind.  During  the  past  two 
years,  the  Swami  wrote  to  his  friends,  he  had  gone  through  great  mental  anguish. 
His  message,  to  be  sure,  had  begun  to  reach  an  ever  increasing  number  of  people 
both  in  India  and  in  America,  and  naturally  he  had  been  made  happy  by  this 
fact;  yet  he  had  suffered  intensely  on  account  of  “poverty,  treachery,  and  my 
own  foolishness,”  as  he  wrote  to  Mary  Hale  on  February  20,  1900.  Though 
his  outward  appearance  was  that  of  a  stern  non-dualist,  he  possessed  a  tender 
heart  that  was  often  bruised  by  the  blows  of  the  world.  To  Margaret  Noble  he 
wrote  on  December  6,  1899:  “Some  people  are  made  that  way — to  love  being 
miserable.  If  I  did  not  break  my  heart  over  the  people  I  was  born  amongst,  I 
would  do  it  for  somebody  else.  I  am  sure  of  that.  This  is  the  way  of  some — I  am 
coming  to  see  it.  We  are  all  after  happiness,  true,  but  some  are  only  happy 
in  being  unhappy — queer,  is  it  not?” 

How  sensitive  he  was  to  the  sufferings  of  men!  “I  went  years  ago  to  the 
Himalayas,”  he  wrote  to  an  American  friend  on  December  12,  1899,  “never 
to  come  back — and  my  sister  committed  suicide,  the  news  reached  me  there, 
and  that  weak  heart  flung  me  off  from  the  prospect  of  peace!  It  is  the  weak 
heart  that  has  driven  me  out  of  India  to  seek  some  help  for  those  I  love,  and 
here  I  am!  Peace  have  I  sought,  but  the  heart,  that  seat  of  bhakti,  would  not 
allow  me  to  find  it.  Struggle  and  torture,  torture  and  struggle!  Well,  so  be  it 
then,  since  it  is  my  fate;  and  the  quicker  it  is  over,  the  better.” 

His  health  had  been  indifferent  even  before  he  had  left  for  the  West.  “This 
sort  of  nervous  body,”  he  wrote  on  November  15,  1899,  “is  just  an  instrument 
to  play  great  music  at  times,  and  at  times  to  moan  in  darkness.”  While  in 
America,  he  was  under  the  treatment  of  an  osteopath  and  a  “magnetic  healer,” 
but  received  no  lasting  benefit.  At  Los  Angeles  he  got  the  news  of  the  serious 
illness  of  his  brother  disciple  Niranjan.  Mr.  Sturdy,  his  beloved  English  disciple, 
had  given  up  the  Swami  because  he  felt  that  the  teacher  was  not  living  in 


Vivekananda 


157 

the  West  the  life  of  an  ascetic.  Miss  Henrietta  Muller,  who  had  helped  him 
financially  to  buy  the  Belur  Math,  left  him  on  account  of  his  illness;  she  could 
not  associate  sickness  with  holiness.  One  of  the  objects  of  the  Swami’s  visit  to 
California  was  to  raise  money  to  promote  his  various  activities  in  India:  people 
came  to  his  meetings  in  large  numbers,  but  of  money  he  received  very  little. 
He  suffered  a  bereavement  in  the  passing  away  of  his  devoted  friend  Mr.  George 
Hale  of  Chicago.  Reports  about  the  work  in  New  York  caused  him  much 
anxiety.  Swami  Abhedananda  was  not  getting  on  well  with  some  of  Viveka- 
nanda’s  disciples,  and  Mr.  Leggett  severed  his  relationship  with  the  Society. 
All  these  things,  like  so  many  claws,  pierced  Vivekananda’s  heart.  Further,  per¬ 
haps  he  now  felt  that  his  mission  on  earth  was  over.  He  began  to  lose  interest 
in  work.  The  arrow,  however,  was  still  flying,  carried  by  its  original  impetus; 
but  it  was  approaching  the  end,  when  it  would  fall  to  the  ground. 

The  Swami  longed  to  return  to  India.  On  January  17,  1900,  he  wrote  to  Mrs. 
Ole  Bull  that  he  wanted  to  build  a  hut  on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges  and  spend 
the  rest  of  his  life  there  with  his  mother:  “She  has  suffered  much  through  me. 
I  must  try  to  smooth  her  last  days.  Do  you  know,  this  was  just  exactly  what  the 
great  Sankaracharya  himself  had  to  do.  He  had  to  go  back  to  his  mother  in 
the  last  few  days  of  her  life.  I  accept  it.  I  am  resigned.” 

In  the  same  letter  to  Mrs.  Ole  Bull  he  wrote:  “I  am  but  a  child;  what  work 
have  I  to  do?  My  powers  I  passed  over  to  you.  I  see  it.  I  cannot  any  more  tell 
from  the  platform.  Don’t  tell  it  to  anyone — not  even  to  Joe.  I  am  glad.  I  want 
rest;  not  that  I  am  tired,  but  the  next  phase  will  be  the  miraculous  touch  and 
not  the  tongue — like  Ramakrishna’s.  The  word  has  gone  to  you,  the  boys,  and 
to  Margot.”34 

He  was  fast  losing  interest  in  active  work.  On  April  7,  1900,  he  wrote  to  a 
friend: 

“My  boat  is  nearing  the  calm  harbour  from  which  it  is  never  more  to  be 
driven  out.  Glory,  glory  unto  Mother!35  I  have  no  wish,  no  ambition  now. 
Blessed  be  Mother!  I  am  the  servant  of  Ramakrishna.  I  am  merely  a  machine. 
I  know  nothing  else.  Nor  do  I  want  to  know.” 

To  another  friend  he  wrote,  on  April  12,  in  similar  vein: 

Work  always  brings  dirt  with  it.  I  paid  for  the  accumulated  dirt  with  bad  health. 

I  am  glad  my  mind  is  all  the  better  for  it.  There  is  a  mellowness  and  a  calmness  in  life 
now,  which  never  was  before.  I  am  learning  now  how  to  be  attached  as  well  as  detached 
— and  mentally  becoming  my  own  master.  .  .  .  Mother  is  doing  Her  own  work.  I  do 
not  worry  much  now.  Moths  like  me  die  by  the  thousands  every  minute.  Her  work  goes 
on  all  the  same.  Glory  unto  Mother!  ...  For  me — alone  and  drifting  about  in  the  will- 
current  of  the  Mother  has  been  my  life.  The  moment  I  have  tried  to  break  it,  that 
moment  I  was  hurt.  Her  will  be  done.  ...  I  am  happy,  at  peace  with  myself,  and  more 
of  the  sannyasin  than  I  ever  was.  The  love  for  my  own  kith  and  kin  is  growing  less 
every  day — for  Mother,  increasing.  Memories  of  long  nights  of  vigil  with  Sri  Rama¬ 
krishna,  under  the  Dakshineswar  banyan  tree,  are  waking  up  once  more.  And  work? 
What  is  work?  Whose  work?  Whom  to  work  for?  I  am  free.  I  am  Mother’s  child.  She 
works,  She  plays.  Why  should  I  plan?  What  shall  I  plan?  Things  came  and  went,  just 

34  Referring  to  Sister  Nivedita. 

35  Referring  to  the  Divine  Mother  of  the  Universe, 


158  Vivekananda 

as  She  liked,  without  my  planning,  in  spite  of  my  planning.  We  are  Her  automata.  She 
is  the  wire-puller. 

With  the  approaching  end  of  his  mission  and  earthly  life,  he  realized  ever 
more  clearly  how  like  a  stage  this  world  is.  In  August  1899  he  wrote  to  Miss 
Marie  Halboister:  “This  toy  world  would  not  be  here,  this  play  could  not  go  on, 
if  we  were  knowing  players.  We  must  play  blindfolded.  Some  of  us  have  taken 
the  part  of  the  rogue  of  the  play;  some,  of  the  hero — never  mind,  it  is  all  play. 
This  is  the  only  consolation.  There  are  demons  and  lions  and  tigers  and  what 
not  on  the  stage,  but  they  are  all  muzzled.  They  snap  but  cannot  bite.  The 
world  cannot  touch  our  souls.  If  you  want,  even  if  the  body  be  torn  and  bleed¬ 
ing,  you  may  enjoy  the  greatest  peace  in  your  mind.  And  the  way  to  that  is  to 
attain  hopelessness.  Do  you  know  that?  Not  the  imbecile  attitude  of  despair, 
but  the  contempt  of  the  conqueror  for  the  things  he  has  attained,  for  the  things 
he  has  struggled  for  and  then  thrown  aside  as  beneath  his  worth.” 

To  Mary  Hale,  who  “has  been  always  the  sweetest  note  in  my  jarring  and 
clashing  life,”  he  wrote  on  March  26,  1900: 

This  is  to  let  you  know  “I  am  very  happy.”  Not  that  I  am  getting  into  a  shadowy 
optimism,  but  my  power  of  suffering  is  increasing.  I  am  being  lifted  up  above  the  pesti¬ 
lential  miasma  of  this  world's  joys  and  sorrows.  They  are  losing  their  meaning.  It  is  a 
land  of  dreams.  It  does  not  matter  whether  one  enjoys  or  weeps — they  are  but  dreams, 
and  as  such  must  break  sooner  or  later.  ...  I  am  attaining  peace  that  passeth  under¬ 
standing — which  is  neither  joy  nor  sorrow,  but  something  above  them  both.  Tell 
Mother36  that.  My  passing  through  the  valley  of  death — physical,  mental — these  last 
two  years,  has  helped  me  in  this.  Now  I  am  nearing  that  Peace,  the  eternal  Silence. 
Now  I  mean  to  see  things  as  they  are — everything  in  that  Peace — perfect  in  its  way. 
“He  whose  joy  is  only  in  himself,  whose  desires  are  only  in  himself,”  he  has  learnt  his 
lessons.  This  is  the  great  lesson  that  we  are  here  to  learn  through  myriads  of  births  and 
heavens  and  hells:  There  is  nothing  to  be  sought  for,  asked  for,  desired,  beyond  one's  self. 
The  greatest  thing  I  can  obtain  is  myself.  I  am  free — therefore  I  require  none  else  for 
my  happiness.  Alone  through  eternity — because  I  was  free,  am  free,  and  will  remain  free 
for  ever.  This  is  Vedantism.  I  preached  the  theory  so  long,  but  oh,  joy!  Mary,  my  dear 
sister,  I  am  realizing  it  now  every  day.  Yes,  I  am.  I  am  free — Alone — Alone.  I  am  the 
One  without  a  second. 

Vivekananda's  eyes  were  looking  at  the  light  of  another  world,  his  real  abode. 
And  how  vividly  and  touchingly  he  expressed  his  nostalgic  yearning  to  return 
to  it,  in  his  letter  of  April  18,  1900,  written  from  Alameda,  California,  to  Miss 
MacLeod,  his  ever  loyal  Joe: 

Just  now  I  received  your  and  Mrs.  Bull's  welcome  letter.  I  direct  this  to  London.  I  am 
so  glad  Mrs.  Leggett  is  on  the  sure  way  to  recovery. 

I  am  so  sorry  Mr.  Leggett  resigned  the  presidentship. 

Well,  I  keep  quiet  for  fear  of  making  further  trouble.  You  know  my  methods  are 
extremely  harsh,  and  once  roused  I  may  rattle  Abhedananda  too  much  for  his  peace  of 
mind. 

I  wrote  to  him  only  to  tell  him  his  notions  about  Mrs.  Bull  are  entirely  wrong. 

Work  is  always  difficult.  Pray  for  me,  Joe,  that  my  work  may  stop  for  ever  and  my 
whole  soul  be  absorbed  in  Mother.  Her  work  She  knows. 


36  Referring  to  Mrs.  Hale. 


Vivekananda  1 59 

You  must  be  glad  to  be  in  London  once  more — the  old  friends — give  them  all  my 
love  and  gratitude. 

I  am  well,  very  well  mentally.  I  feel  the  rest  of  the  soul  more  than  that  of  the  body. 
The  battles  are  lost  and  won.  I  have  bundled  my  things  and  am  waiting  for  the  Great 
Deliverer. 

Siva,  O  Siva,  carry  my  boat  to  the  other  shore! 

After  all,  Joe,  I  am  only  the  boy  who  used  to  listen  with  rapt  wonderment  to  the 
wonderful  words  of  Ramakrishna  under  the  banyan  at  Dakshineswar.  That  is  my  true 
nature — works  and  activities,  doing  good  and  so  forth,  are  all  superimpositions.  Now  I 
again  hear  his  voice,  the  same  old  voice  thrilling  my  soul.  Bonds  are  breaking — love 
dying,  work  becoming  tasteless — the  glamour  is  off  life.  Now  only  the  voice  of  the 
Master  calling. — “I  come,  Lord,  I  come.” — "Let  the  dead  bury  the  dead.  Follow  thou 
Me.” — "I  come,  my  beloved  Lord,  I  come.” 

Yes,  I  come.  Nirvana  is  before  me.  I  feel  it  at  times,  the  same  infinite  ocean  of  peace, 
without  a  ripple,  a  breath. 

I  am  glad  I  was  born,  glad  I  suffered  so,  glad  I  did  make  big  blunders,  glad  to  enter 
peace.  I  leave  none  bound,  I  take  no  bonds.  Whether  this  body  will  fall  and  release  me 
or  I  enter  into  freedom  in  the  body,  the  old  man  is  gone,  gone  for  ever,  never  to  come 
back  again! 

The  guide,  the  guru,  the  leader,  the  teacher,  has  passed  away;  the  boy,  the  student, 
the  servant,  is  left  behind. 

You  understand  why  I  do  not  want  to  meddle  with  Abhedananda.  Who  am  I  to 
meddle  with  any,  Joe?  I  have  long  given  up  my  place  as  a  leader — I  have  no  right  to 
raise  my  voice.  Since  the  beginning  of  this  year  I  have  not  dictated  anything  in  India. 
You  know  that.  Many  thanks  for  what  you  and  Mrs.  Bull  have  been  to  me  in  the  past. 
All  blessings  follow  you  ever!  The  sweetest  moments  of  my  life  have  been  when  I  was 
drifting.  I  am  drifting  again — with  the  bright  warm  sun  ahead  and  masses  of  vegetation 
around — and  in  the  heat  everything  is  so  still,  so  calm — and  I  am  drifting,  languidly — 
in  the  warm  heart  of  the  river.  I  dare  not  make  a  splash  with  my  hands  or  feet — for  fear 
of  breaking  the  wonderful  stillness,  stillness  that  makes  you  feel  sure  it  is  an  illusion! 

Behind  my  work  was  ambition,  behind  my  love  was  personality,  behind  my  purity 
was  fear,  behind  my  guidance  the  thirst  for  power.  Now  they  are  vanishing  and  I  drift. 
I  come,  Mother,  I  come,  in  Thy  warm  bosom,  floating  wheresoever  Thou  takest  me, 
in  the  voiceless,  in  the  strange,  in  the  wonderland,  I  come — a  spectator,  no  more  an  actor. 

Oh,  it  is  so  calm!  My  thoughts  seem  to  come  from  a  great,  great  distance  in  the 
interior  of  my  own  heart.  They  seem  like  faint,  distant  whispers,  and  peace  is  upon 
everything,  sweet,  sweet  peace — like  that  one  feels  for  a  few  moments  just  before  falling 
into  sleep,  when  things  are  seen  and  felt  like  shadows — without  fear,  without  love, 
without  emotion — peace  that  one  feels  alone,  surrounded  with  statues  and  pictures. — 
I  come,  Lord,  I  come. 

The  world  is,  but  not  beautiful  nor  ugly,  but  as  sensations  without  exciting  any  emo¬ 
tion.  Oh,  Joe,  the  blessedness  of  it!  Everything  is  good  and  beautiful;  for  things  are  all 
losing  their  relative  proportions  to  me — my  body  among  the  first.  Om  That  Existence! 

I  hope  great  things  come  to  you  all  in  London  and  Paris.  Fresh  joy — fresh  benefits  to 
mind  and  body. 


THE  PARIS  CONGRESS 

But  the  arrow  of  Swami  Vivekananda’s  life  had  not  yet  finished  its  flight. 
Next  he  was  to  be  seen  in  Paris  participating  in  the  Congress  of  the  History 
of  Religions,  held  on  the  occasion  of  the  Universal  Exposition.  This  Congress, 
compared  with  the  Parliament  of  Religions  of  Chicago,  was  a  rather  tame  affair. 


160 


Vivekananda 


The  discussion  was  limited  to  technical  theories  regarding  the  origin  of  the 
rituals  of  religion;  for  the  Catholic  hierarchy,  evidently  not  wanting  a  repetition 
of  the  triumph  of  Oriental  ideas  in  the  American  Parliament,  did  not  allow 
any  discussion  of  religious  doctrines.  Swami  Vivekananda,  on  account  of  his 
failing  health,  took  part  in  only  two  sessions.  He  repudiated  the  theory  of  the 
German  orientalist  Gustav  Oppert  that  the  Siva  lingam  was  a  mere  phallic 
symbol.  He  described  the  Vedas  as  the  common  basis  of  both  Hinduism  and 
Buddhism,  and  held  that  both  Krishna  and  the  Bhagavad  Gita  were  prior  to 
Buddhism.  Further,  he  rejected  the  theory  of  the  Hellenic  influence  on  the 
drama,  art,  literature,  astrology,  and  other  sciences  developed  in  India. 

In  Paris  he  came  to  know  his  distinguished  countryman  J.  C.  Bose,  the  dis¬ 
coverer  of  the  life  and  nervous  system  in  plants,  who  had  been  invited  to  join 
the  scientific  section  of  the  Congress.  The  Swami  referred  to  the  Indian  scientist 
as  “the  pride  and  glory  of  Bengal." 

In  Paris  Swami  Vivekananda  was  the  guest  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Leggett,  at  whose 
house  he  met  many  distinguished  people.  Among  these  was  the  young  Duke  of 
Richelieu,  a  scion  of  an  old  and  aristocratic  family  of  France.  The  title  had 
been  created  by  Louis  XIII,  and  one  of  the  ancestors  of  the  Duke  had  been 
Premier  under  Louis  XVIII.  Born  in  Paris,  educated  at  a  Jesuit  school  in 
France,  and  later  graduated  from  the  University  of  Aix-en-Provence,  the  Duke 
of  Richelieu  became  greatly  attached  to  the  Swami  and  visited  him  frequently. 
On  the  eve  of  Vivekananda’s  departure  from  Paris,  the  Swami  asked  the  Duke 
if  he  would  renounce  the  world  and  become  his  disciple.  The  Duke  wanted  to 
know  what  he  would  gain  in  return  for  such  renunciation,  and  the  Swami  said, 
“I  shall  give  you  the  desire  for  death."  When  asked  to  explain,  the  Swami 
declared  that  he  would  give  the  Duke  such  a  state  of  mind  that  when  con¬ 
fronted  by  death  he  would  laugh  at  it.  But  the  Duke  preferred  to  pursue  a 
worldly  career,  though  he  cherished  a  life-long  devotion  to  Swami  Vivekananda. 

During  his  stay  in  Paris  the  Swami  met  such  prominent  people  as  Professor 
Patrick  Geddes  of  Edinburgh  University,  Pere  Hyacinthe,  Hiram  Maxim,  Sarah 
Bernhardt,  Jules  Bois,  and  Madame  Emma  Calve.  Pere  Hyacinthe,  a  Carmelite 
monk  who  had  renounced  his  vows,  had  married  an  American  lady  and  assumed 
the  name  of  Charles  Loyson.  The  Swami,  however,  always  addressed  him  by  his 
old  monastic  name  and  described  him  as  endowed  with  “a  very  sweet  nature" 
and  the  temperament  of  a  lover  of  God.  Maxim,  the  inventor  of  the  gun  asso¬ 
ciated  with  his  name,  was  a  great  connoisseur  and  lover  of  India  and  China. 
Sarah  Bernhardt  also  bore  a  great  love  for  India,  which  she  often  described  as 
“very  ancient,  very  civilized."  To  visit  India  was  the  dream  of  her  life. 

Madame  Calve  the  Swami  had  met  in  America,  and  now  he  came  to  know 
her  more  intimately.  She  became  one  of  his  devoted  followers.  “She  was  born 
poor,"  he  once  wrote  of  her,  “but  by  her  innate  talents,  prodigious  labour  and 
diligence,  and  after  wrestling  against  much  hardship,  she  is  now  enormously 
rich  and  commands  respect  from  kings  and  emperors.  .  .  .  The  rare  combina¬ 
tion  of  beauty,  youth,  talents,  and  ‘divine'  voice  has  assigned  Calve  the  highest 
place  among  the  singers  of  the  West.  There  is,  indeed,  no  better  teacher  than 
misery  and  poverty.  That  constant  fight  against  the  dire  poverty,  misery,  and 
hardship  of  the  days  of  her  girlhood,  which  has  led  to  her  present  triumph  over 


Vivekananda 


161 


them,  has  brought  into  her  life  a  unique  sympathy  and  a  depth  of  thought 
with  a  wide  outlook/’ 

After  the  Swami’s  passing  away,  Madame  Calve  visited  the  Belur  Math,  the 
headquarters  of  the  Ramakrishna  Mission.  In  old  age  she  embraced  the  Catholic 
faith  and  had  to  give  up,  officially,  her  allegiance  to  Swami  Vivekananda.  But 
one  wonders  whether  she  was  able  to  efface  him  from  her  heart. 

Jules  Bois,  with  whom  the  Swami  stayed  for  a  few  days  in  Paris,  was  a  dis¬ 
tinguished  writer.  “We  have,”  the  Swami  wrote  to  a  disciple,  “many  great  ideas 
in  common  and  feel  happy  together.” 

Most  of  the  Swami’s  time  in  Paris  was  devoted  to  the  study  of  French  culture 
and  especially  the  language.  He  wrote  a  few  letters  in  French.  About  the  culture, 
his  appreciation  was  tempered  with  criticism.  He  spoke  of  Paris  as  the  “home 
of  liberty”;  there  the  ethics  and  society  of  the  West  had  been  formed,  and  its 
university  had  been  the  model  of  all  others.  But  in  a  letter  to  Swami  Turiya- 
nanda,  dated  September  1,  1900,  he  also  wrote:  “The  people  of  France  are  mere 
intcllectualists.  They  run  after  worldly  things  and  firmly  believe  God  and  souls 
to  be  mere  superstitions;  they  are  extremely  loath  to  talk  on  such  subjects.  This 
is  truly  a  materialistic  country.” 

After  the  Congress  of  the  History  of  Religions  was  concluded,  the  Swami 
spent  a  few  days  at  Lannion  in  Brittany,  as  the  guest  of  Mrs.  Ole  Bull.  Sister 
Nivedita,  who  had  just  returned  from  America,  was  also  in  the  party.  There, 
in  his  conversations,  the  Swami  dwelt  mostly  on  Buddha  and  his  teachings. 
Contrasting  Buddhism  with  Hinduism,  he  one  day  said  that  the  former  exhorted 
men  to  “realize  all  this  as  illusion,”  while  Hinduism  asked  them  to  “realize  that 
within  the  illusion  is  the  Real.”  Of  how  this  was  to  be  done,  Hinduism  never 
presumed  to  enunciate  any  rigid  law.  The  Buddhist  command  could  only  be 
carried  out  through  monasticism;  the  Hindu  might  be  fulfilled  through  any 
state  of  life.  All  alike  were  roads  to  the  One  Real.  One  of  the  highest  and  the 
greatest  expressions  of  the  Faith  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  a  butcher,  preaching, 
by  the  orders  of  a  married  woman,  to  a  sannyasin.37  Thus  Buddhism  became 
the  religion  of  a  monastic  order,  but  Hinduism,  in  spite  of  its  exaltation  of 
monasticism,  remains  ever  the  religion  of  faithfulness  to  daily  duty,  whatever 
it  may  be,  as  the  path  by  which  man  may  attain  to  God. 

From  Lannion,  on  St.  Michael’s  Day,  he  visited  Mont  St.  Michel.  He  was 
struck  by  the  similarity  between  the  rituals  of  Hinduism  and  Roman  Catholi¬ 
cism.  He  said,  “Christianity  is  not  alien  to  Hinduism.” 

Nivedita  took  leave  of  the  Swami  in  Brittany  and  departed  for  England  in 
order  to  raise  funds  for  her  work  on  behalf  of  Indian  women.  While  giving  her 
his  blessings,  the  Swami  said:  “There  is  a  peculiar  sect  of  Mohammedans  who 
are  reported  to  be  so  fanatical  that  they  take  each  new-born  babe  and  expose  it, 
saying,  'If  God  made  thee,  perish!  If  Ali  made  thee,  live!’  Now  this  which  they 
say  to  the  child,  I  say,  but  in  the  opposite  sense,  to  you,  tonight — 'Go  forth 
into  the  world,  and  there,  if  I  made  you,  be  destroyed!  If  Mother  made  you, 
live!’  ”  Perhaps  the  Swami  remembered  how  some  of  his  beloved  Western  dis- 

37  The  butcher  and  the  woman,  in  the  story  referred  to,  which  is  found  in  one  of  the 
Puranas,  were  householders  who  had  received  spiritual  illumination  through  the  per¬ 
formance  of  their  respective  duties. 


162 


Vivekananda 


ciples,  unable  to  understand  the  profundity  of  his  life  and  teachings,  had 
deserted  him.  He  also  realized  the  difficulties  Westerners  experienced  in  identi¬ 
fying  themselves  completely  with  the  customs  of  India.  He  had  told  Nivedita, 
before  they  left  India,  that  she  must  resume,  as  if  she  had  never  broken  them 
off,  all  her  old  habits  and  social  customs  of  the  West. 

On  October  24,  1900,  Swami  Vivekananda  left  Paris  for  the  East,  by  way  of 
Vienna  and  Constantinople.  Besides  the  Swami,  the  party  consisted  of  Monsieur 
and  Madame  Loyson,  Jules  Bois,  Madame  Calve,  and  Miss  MacLeod.  The 
Swami  was  Calve’s  guest. 

In  Vienna  the  Swami  remarked,  “If  Turkey  is  called  'the  sick  man  of  Europe/ 
Austria  ought  to  be  called  'the  sick  woman  of  Europe’!" 

The  party  arrived  in  Constantinople  after  passing  through  Hungary,  Serbia, 
Romania,  and  Bulgaria.  Next  the  Swami  and  his  friends  came  to  Athens.  They 
visited  several  islands  and  a  Greek  monastery.  From  Athens  they  sailed  to  Egypt 
and  the  Swami  was  delighted  to  visit  the  museum  in  Cairo.  While  in  Cairo, 
he  and  his  women  devotees,  one  day,  in  the  course  of  sightseeing,  unknowingly 
entered  the  part  of  the  city  in  which  the  girls  of  ill  fame  lived,  and  when  the 
inmates  hurled  coarse  jokes  at  the  Swami  from  their  porches,  the  ladies  wanted 
to  take  him  away;  but  he  refused  to  go.  Some  of  the  prostitutes  came  into  the 
street,  and  the  ladies  saw  from  a  distance  that  they  knelt  before  him  and  kissed 
the  hem  of  his  garment.  Presently  the  Swami  joined  his  friends  and  drove  away. 

In  Cairo  the  Swami  had  a  presentiment  that  something  had  happened  to 
Mr.  Sevier.  He  became  restless  to  return  to  India,  took  the  first  available  boat, 
and  sailed  for  Bombay  alone. 

Throughout  his  European  tour  the  Swami’s  friends  had  noticed  that  he  was 
becoming  more  and  more  detached  from  the  spectacle  of  external  things,  and 
buried  in  meditation.  A  sort  of  indifference  to  the  world  was  gradually  over¬ 
powering  him.  On  August  14  he  had  written  to  a  friend  that  he  did  not  expect 
to  live  long.  From  Paris  he  wrote  to  Turiyananda:  “My  body  and  mind  are 
broken  down;  I  need  rest  badly.  In  addition  there  is  not  a  single  person  on 
whom  I  can  depend;  on  the  other  hand,  as  long  as  I  live,  all  will  be  very  selfish, 
depending  upon  me  for  everything."  In  Egypt  the  Swami  had  seemed  to  be 
turning  the  last  pages  of  his  life-experience.  One  of  the  party  later  remarked, 
“How  tired  and  world-weary  he  seemed!"  Nivedita,  who  had  had  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  observing  him  closely  during  his  second  trip  to  the  West,  writes: 

The  outstanding  impression  made  by  the  Swami’s  bearing  during  all  these  months  of 
European  and  American  life,  was  one  of  almost  complete  indifference  to  his  surroundings. 
Current  estimates  of  value  left  him  entirely  unaffected.  He  was  never  in  any  way  startled 
or  incredulous  under  success,  being  too  deeply  convinced  of  the  greatness  of  the  Power 
that  worked  through  him,  to  be  surprised  by  it.  But  neither  was  he  unnerved  by  external 
failure.  Both  victory  and  defeat  would  come  and  go.  He  was  their  witness.  .  .  .  He  moved 
fearless  and  unhesitant  through  the  luxury  of  the  West.  As  determinedly  as  I  had  seen 
him  in  India,  dressed  in  the  two  garments  of  simple  folk,  sitting  on  the  floor  and  eating 
with  his  fingers,  so,  equally  without  doubt  or  shrinking,  was  his  acceptance  of  the  com¬ 
plexity  of  the  means  of  living  in  America  or  France.  Monk  and  king,  he  said,  were  the 
obverse  and  reverse  of  a  single  medal.  From  the  use  of  the  best  to  the  renunciation  of 
all  was  but  one  step.  India  had  thrown  all  her  prestige  in  the  past  round  poverty.  Some 
prestige  was  in  the  future  to  be  cast  round  wealth. 


Vivekananda 


163 


For  some  time  the  Swami  had  been  trying  to  disentangle  himself  from  the 
responsibilities  of  work.  He  had  already  transferred  the  property  of  the  Belur 
Math  from  his  own  name  to  the  Trustees  of  the  organization.  On  August  25, 
1900,  he  had  written  to  Nivedita  from  Paris: 

Now  I  am  free,  as  I  have  kept  no  power  or  authority  or  position  for  me  in  the  work. 
I  also  have  resigned  the  Presidentship  of  the  Ramakrishna  Mission.  The  Math  etc. 
belong  now  to  the  immediate  disciples  of  Ramakrishna  except  myself.  The  Presidentship 
is  now  Brahmananda’s — next  it  will  fall  on  Premananda  etc.,  in  turn.  I  am  so  glad  a 
whole  load  is  off  me.  Now  I  am  happy.  .  .  . 

I  no  longer  represent  anybody,  nor  am  I  responsible  to  anybody.  As  to  my  friends,  I 
had  a  morbid  sense  of  obligation.  I  have  thought  well  and  find  I  owe  nothing  to  anybody 
— if  anything.  I  have  given  my  best  energies,  unto  death  almost,  and  received  only 
hectoring  and  mischief-making  and  botheration.  .  .  . 

Your  letter  indicates  that  I  am  jealous  of  your  new  friends.  You  must  know  once  for 
all  I  am  born  without  jealousy,  without  avarice,  without  the  desire  to  rule — whatever 
other  vices  I  may  be  born  with. 

I  never  directed  you  before;  now,  after  I  am  nobody  in  the  work,  I  have  no  direction 
whatever.  I  only  know  this  much:  So  long  as  you  serve  “Mother"  with  a  whole  heart, 
She  will  be  your  guide. 

I  never  had  any  jealousy  about  what  friends  you  made.  I  never  criticized  my  brethren 
for  mixing  up  in  anything.  Only  I  do  believe  the  Western  people  have  the  peculiarity  of 
trying  to  force  upon  others  whatever  seems  good  to  them,  forgetting  that  what  is  good 
for  you  may  not  be  good  for  others.  As  such  I  am  afraid  you  would  try  to  force  upon 
others  whatever  turn  your  mind  might  take  in  contact  with  new  friends.  That  was  the 
only  reason  I  sometimes  tried  to  stop  any  particular  influence,  and  nothing  else. 

You  are  free.  Have  your  own  choice,  your  own  work.  .  .  . 

Friends  or  foes,  they  are  all  instruments  in  Her  hands  to  help  us  work  out  our  own 
karma,  through  pleasure  or  pain.  As  such,  “Mother"  bless  them  all. 

How  did  America  impress  Swami  Vivekananda  during  his  second  visit  to  the 
West?  What  impressions  did  he  carry  to  India  of  the  state  of  things  in  the  New 
World?  During  his  first  visit  he  had  been  enthusiastic  about  almost  everything 
he  saw — the  power,  the  organization,  the  material  prosperity,  the  democracy, 
and  the  spirit  of  freedom  and  justice.  But  now  he  was  greatly  disillusioned.  In 
America’s  enormous  combinations  and  ferocious  struggle  for  supremacy  he  dis¬ 
covered  the  power  of  Mammon.  He  saw  that  the  commercial  spirit  was  com¬ 
posed,  for  the  most  part,  of  greed,  selfishness,  and  a  struggle  for  privilege  and 
power.  He  was  disgusted  with  the  ruthlessness  of  wealthy  business  men,  swal¬ 
lowing  up  the  small  tradespeople  by  means  of  large  combinations.  That  was 
indeed  tyranny.  He  could  admire  an  organization;  "but  what  beauty  is  there 
among  a  pack  of  wolves?”  he  said  to  a  disciple.  He  also  noticed,  in  all  their 
nakedness,  the  social  vices  and  the  arrogance  of  race,  religion,  and  colour. 
America,  he  confided  to  Miss  MacLeod,  would  not  be  the  instrument  to  har¬ 
monize  East  and  West. 

During  his  trip  through  Eastern  Europe,  from  Paris  to  Constantinople,  he 
smelt  war.  He  felt  the  stench  of  it  rising  on  all  sides.  "Europe,”  he  remarked, 
"is  a  vast  military  camp.” 

But  the  tragedy  of  the  West  had  not  been  altogether  unperceived  by  him 
even  during  his  first  visit.  As  early  as  1895  he  said  to  Sister  Christine:  "Europe 


164 


Vivekananda 


is  on  the  edge  of  a  volcano.  If  the  fire  is  not  extinguished  by  a  flood  of  spiritu¬ 
ality,  it  will  erupt." 

One  cannot  but  be  amazed  at  the  Swami's  prophetic  intuition  as  expressed 
through  the  following  remarks  made  to  Christine  in  1896:  ‘'The  next  upheaval 
will  come  from  Russia  or  China.  I  cannot  see  clearly  which,  but  it  will  be  either 
the  one  or  the  other."  He  further  said:  “The  world  is  in  the  third  epoch,  under 
the  domination  of  the  vaisya.  The  fourth  epoch  will  be  under  that  of  the 
sudra."38 


TOWARDS  THE  END 

Swami  Vivekananda  disembarked  in  Bombay  and  immediately  entrained  for 
Calcutta,  arriving  at  the  Belur  Math  late  in  the  evening  of  December  9,  1900. 
The  Swami  had  not  informed  anybody  of  his  return.  The  gate  of  the  monastery 
was  locked  for  the  night.  He  heard  the  dinner  bell,  and  in  his  eagerness  to  join 
the  monks  at  their  meal,  scaled  the  gate.  There  was  great  rejoicing  over  his 
home-coming. 

At  the  Math  Swami  Vivekananda  was  told  about  the  passing  away  of  his 
beloved  disciple  Mr.  Sevier  at  Mayavati  in  the  Himalayas.  This  was  the  sad 
news  of  which  he  had  had  a  presentiment  in  Egypt.  He  was  greatly  distressed, 
and  on  December  11  wrote  to  Miss  MacLeod:  “Thus  two  great  Englishmen39 
gave  up  their  lives  for  us — us,  the  Hindus.  This  is  martyrdom,  if  anything  is." 
Again  he  wrote  to  her  on  December  26:  “He  was  cremated  on  the  bank  of  the 
river  that  flows  by  his  asrama,  a  Ja  Hindu,  covered  with  garlands,  the  brahmins 
carrying  the  body  and  the  boys  chanting  the  Vedas.  The  cause  has  already  two 
martyrs.  It  makes  me  love  dear  England  and  its  heroic  breed.  The  Mother  is 
watering  the  plant  of  future  India  with  the  best  blood  of  England.  Glory  unto 
Her!" 

The  Swami  stayed  at  the  Math  for  eighteen  days  and  left  for  Mayavati  to  see 
Mrs.  Sevier.  The  distance  from  the  railroad  station  to  the  monastery  at  Maya¬ 
vati  was  sixty-five  miles.  The  Swami  did  not  give  the  inmates  sufficient  time  to 
arrange  for  his  comfortable  transportation.  He  left  the  railroad  station  in  a 
hurry  in  the  company  of  Shivananda  and  Sadananda.  The  winter  of  that  year 
was  particularly  severe  in  the  Himalayas;  there  was  a  heavy  snowfall  on  the  way, 
and  in  his  present  state  of  health  he  could  hardly  walk.  He  reached  the  mon¬ 
astery,  however,  on  January  3,  1901. 

The  meeting  with  Mrs.  Sevier  stirred  his  emotions.  He  was  delighted,  how- 

38  The  vaisya,  or  the  merchant,  and  the  sudra,  or  the  worker,  represent  the  third  and 
fourth  castes  in  Hindu  society.  Swami  Vivekananda  said  that  the  four  castes,  by  turn, 
governed  human  society.  The  brahmin  dominated  the  thought-current  of  the  world 
during  the  glorious  days  of  the  ancient  Hindu  civilization.  Then  came  the  rule  of  the 
kshattriya,  the  military,  as  manifested  through  the  supremacy  of  Europe  from  the  time 
of  the  Roman  Empire  to  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Next  followed  the  rule 
of  the  vaisya,  marked  by  the  rise  of  America.  The  Swami  prophesied  the  coming  suprem¬ 
acy  of  the  sudra  class.  After  the  completion  of  the  cycle,  he  said,  the  spiritual  culture 
would  again  assert  itself  and  influence  human  civilization  through  the  power  of  the 
brahmin.  Swami  Vivekananda  often  spoke  of  the  future  greatness  of  India  as  surpassing 
all  her  glories  of  the  past. 

39  The  other  was  Mr.  Goodwin. 


Vivekananda 


165 


ever,  to  see  the  magnificent  view  of  the  eternal  snow  and  also  the  progress  of 
the  work.  Because  of  the  heavy  winter,  he  was  forced  to  stay  indoors  most 
of  the  time.  It  was  a  glorious  occasion  for  the  members  of  the  asrama.  The 
Swami’s  conversation  was  inspiring.  He  spoke  of  the  devotion  of  his  Western 
disciples  to  his  cause,  and  in  this  connexion  particularly  mentioned  the  name 
of  Mr.  Sevier.  He  also  emphasized  the  necessity  of  loyalty  to  the  work  under¬ 
taken,  loyalty  to  the  leader,  and  loyalty  to  the  organization.  But  the  leader, 
the  Swami  said,  must  command  respect  and  obedience  by  his  character.  While 
at  Mayavati,  in  spite  of  a  suffocating  attack  of  asthma,  he  was  busy  with  his 
huge  correspondence  and  wrote  three  articles  for  the  magazine  Prabuddha 
Bharata.  The  least  physical  effort  exhausted  him.  One  day  he  exclaimed,  “My 
body  is  done  for!” 

The  Advaita  Asrama  at  Mayavati  had  been  founded,  as  may  be  remembered, 
with  a  view  to  enabling  its  members  to  develop  their  spiritual  life  through  the 
practice  of  the  non-dualistic  discipline.  All  forms  of  ritual  and  worship  were 
strictly  excluded.  But  some  of  the  members,  accustomed  to  rituals,  had  set  apart 
a  room  as  the  shrine,  where  a  picture  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  was  installed  and 
worshipped  daily.  One  morning  the  Swami  chanced  to  enter  this  room  while 
the  worship  was  going  on.  He  said  nothing  at  that  time,  but  in  the  evening 
severely  reprimanded  the  inmates  for  violating  the  rules  of  the  monastery.  As 
he  did  not  want  to  hurt  their  feelings  too  much,  he  did  not  ask  them  to  discon¬ 
tinue  the  worship,  but  it  was  stopped  by  the  members  themselves. 

One  of  them,  however,  whose  heart  was  set  on  dualistic  worship,  asked  the 
advice  of  the  Holy  Mother.  She  wrote:  “Sri  Ramakrishna  was  all  Advaita  and 
preached  Advaita.  Why  should  you  not  follow  Advaita?  All  his  disciples  are 
Advaitins.” 

After  his  return  to  the  Belur  Math,  the  Swami  said  in  the  course  of  a  con¬ 
versation:  “I  thought  of  having  one  centre  at  least  from  which  the  external 
worship  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  would  be  excluded.  But  I  found  that  the  Old  Man 
had  already  established  himself  even  there.  Well!  Well!” 

The  above  incident  should  not  indicate  any  lack  of  respect  in  Swami  Vive¬ 
kananda  for  Sri  Ramakrishna  or  dualistic  worship.  During  the  last  few  years  of 
his  life  he  showed  a  passionate  love  for  the  Master.  Following  his  return  to 
the  Belur  Math  he  arranged,  as  will  be  seen  presently,  the  birthday  festival 
of  Sri  Ramakrishna  and  the  worship  of  the  Divine  Mother,  according  to  tradi¬ 
tional  rituals. 

The  Swami’s  real  nature  was  that  of  a  lover  of  God,  though  he  appeared 
outwardly  as  a  philosopher.  But  in  all  his  teachings,  both  in  India  and  abroad, 
he  had  emphasized  the  non-dualistic  philosophy.  For  Ultimate  Reality,  in  the 
Hindu  spiritual  tradition,  is  non-dual.  Dualism  is  a  stage  on  the  way  to  non¬ 
dualism.  Through  non-dualism  alone,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Swami,  can  the 
different  dualistic  concepts  of  the  Personal  God  be  harmonized.  Without  the 
foundation  of  the  non-dualistic  Absolute,  dualism  breeds  fanaticism,  exclusive¬ 
ness,  and  dangerous  emotionalism.  He  saw  both  in  India  and  abroad  a  caricature 
of  dualism  in  the  worship  conducted  in  the  temples,  churches,  and  other  places 
of  worship. 

In  India  the  Swami  found  that  non-dualism  had  degenerated  into  mere  dry 


166 


Vivekananda 


intellectual  speculation.  And  so  he  wanted  to  restore  non-dualism  to  its  pristine 
purity.  With  that  end  in  view  he  had  established  the  Advaita  Asrama  at  Maya¬ 
vati,  overlooking  the  gorgeous  eternal  snow  of  the  Himalayas,  where  the  mind 
naturally  soars  to  the  contemplation  of  the  Infinite,  and  there  he  had  banned 
all  vestiges  of  dualistic  worship.  In  the  future,  the  Swami  believed,  all  religions 
would  receive  a  new  orientation  from  the  non-dualistic  doctrine  and  spread 
goodwill  among  men. 

On  his  way  to  Mayavati  Swami  Vivekananda  had  heard  the  melancholy  news 
of  the  passing  away  of  the  Maharaja  of  Khetri,  his  faithful  disciple,  who  had 
borne  the  financial  burden  of  his  first  trip  to  America.  The  Maharaja  had 
undertaken  the  repairing  of  a  high  tower  of  the  Emperor  Akbar’s  tomb  near 
Agra,  and  one  day,  while  inspecting  the  work,  had  missed  his  footing,  fallen 
several  hundred  feet,  and  died.  “Thus,”  wrote  the  Swami  to  Mary  Hale,  “we 
sometimes  come  to  grief  on  account  of  our  zeal  for  antiquity.  Take  care,  Mary, 
don’t  be  too  zealous  about  your  piece  of  Indian  antiquity.”40  “So  you  see,”  the 
Swami  wrote  to  Mary  again,  “things  are  gloomy  with  me  just  now  and  my  own 
health  is  wretched.  Yet  I  am  sure  to  bob  up  soon  and  am  waiting  for  the  next 
turn.” 

The  Swami  left  Mayavati  on  January  18,  and  travelled  four  days  on  slippery 
slopes,  partly  through  snow,  before  reaching  the  railroad  station.  He  arrived  at 
the  Belur  Math  on  January  24. 

Swami  Vivekananda  had  been  in  this  monastery  for  seven  weeks  when  press¬ 
ing  invitations  for  a  lecture  trip  began  to  pour  in  from  East  Bengal.  His  mother, 
furthermore,  had  expressed  an  earnest  desire  to  visit  the  holy  places  situated 
in  that  part  of  India.  On  January  26  he  wrote  to  Mrs.  Ole  Bull:  “I  am  going 
to  take  my  mother  on  pilgrimage.  .  .  .  This  is  the  one  great  wish  of  a  Hindu 
widow.  I  have  brought  only  misery  to  my  people  all  my  life.  I  am  trying  to  fulfil 
this  one  wish  of  hers.” 

On  March  18,  in  the  company  of  a  large  party  of  his  sannyasin  disciples,  the 
Swami  left  for  Dacca,  the  chief  city  of  East  Bengal,  and  arrived  the  next  day. 
He  was  in  poor  health,  suffering  from  both  asthma  and  diabetes.  During  an 
asthmatic  attack,  when  the  pain  was  acute,  he  said  half  dreamily:  “What  does 
it  matter!  I  have  given  them  enough  for  fifteen  hundred  years.”  But  he  had 
hardly  any  rest.  People  besieged  him  day  and  night  for  instruction.  In  Dacca 
he  delivered  two  public  lectures  and  also  visited  the  house  of  Nag  Mahashay, 
where  he  was  entertained  by  the  saint’s  wife. 

Next  he  proceeded  to  Chandranath,  a  holy  place  near  Chittagong,  and  to 
sacred  Kamakhya  in  Assam.  While  in  Assam  he  spent  several  days  at  Shillong 
in  order  to  recover  his  health,  and  there  met  Sir  Henry  Cotton,  the  chief 
Government  official  and  a  friend  of  the  Indians  in  their  national  aspiration. 
The  two  exchanged  many  ideas,  and  at  Sir  Henry’s  request  the  Government 
physician  looked  after  the  Swami’s  health. 

Vivekananda  returned  to  the  Belur  Monastery  in  the  second  week  of  May. 
Concerning  the  impressions  of  his  trip,  he  said  that  a  certain  part  of  Assam  was 
endowed  with  incomparable  natural  beauty.  The  people  were  more  sturdy, 


40  Referring  to  himself. 


Vivekananda 


167 


active,  and  resolute  than  those  of  West  Bengal.  But  in  religious  views  they 
were  rather  conservative  and  even  fanatical.  He  had  found  that  some  of  the 
gullible  people  believed  in  pseudo-incarnations,  several  of  whom  were  living  at 
that  time  in  Dacca  itself.  The  Swami  had  exhorted  the  people  to  cultivate 
manliness  and  the  faculty  of  reasoning.  To  a  sentimental  young  man  of  Dacca 
he  had  said:  “My  boy,  take  my  advice;  develop  your  muscles  and  brain  by  eating 
good  food  and  by  healthy  exercise,  and  then  you  will  be  able  to  think  for 
yourself.  Without  nourishing  food  your  brain  seems  to  have  weakened  a  little.” 
On  another  occasion,  in  a  public  meeting,  he  had  declared,  addressing  the 
youths  of  Bengal,  who  had  very  little  physical  stamina,  “You  will  be  nearer  to 
God  through  football  than  through  the  Bhagavad  Gita.” 

The  brother  disciples  and  his  own  disciples  were  much  concerned  about  the 
Swami’s  health,  which  was  going  from  bad  to  worse.  The  damp  climate  of 
Bengal  did  not  suit  him  at  all;  it  aggravated  his  asthma,  and  further,  he  was 
very,  very  tired.  He  was  earnestly  requested  to  lead  a  quiet  life,  and  to  satisfy 
his  friends  the  Swami  lived  in  the  monastery  for  about  seven  months  in  com¬ 
parative  retirement.  They  tried  to  entertain  him  with  light  talk.  But  he  could  not 
be  dissuaded  from  giving  instruction  to  his  disciples  whenever  the  occasion  arose. 

He  loved  his  room  on  the  second  storey,  in  the  southeast  corner  of  the 
monastery  building,  to  which  he  joyfully  returned  from  his  trips  to  the  West 
or  other  parts  of  India.  This  large  room  with  four  windows  and  three  doors 
served  as  both  study  and  bedroom.  In  the  corner  to  the  right  of  the  entrance 
door  stood  a  mirror  about  five  feet  high,  and  near  this,  a  rack  with  his  ochre 
clothes.  In  the  middle  of  the  room  was  an  iron  bedstead  with  a  spring  mattress, 
which  had  been  given  to  him  by  one  of  his  Western  disciples.  But  he  seldom 
used  it;  for  he  preferred  to  sleep  on  a  small  couch  placed  by  its  side.  A  writing- 
table  with  letters,  manuscripts,  pen,  ink,  paper,  and  blotting-pad,  a  call-bell,  some 
flowers  in  a  metal  vase,  a  photograph  of  the  Master,  a  deer-skin  which  he  used  at 
the  time  of  meditation,  and  a  small  table  with  a  tea-set  completed  the  fur¬ 
nishings. 

Here  he  wrote,  gave  instruction  to  his  disciples  and  brother  monks,  received 
friends,  communed  with  God  in  meditation,  and  sometimes  ate  his  meals.  And 
it  was  in  this  room  that  he  ultimately  entered  into  the  final  ecstasy  from  which 
he  never  returned  to  ordinary  consciousness.  The  room  has  been  preserved  as 
it  was  while  the  Swami  was  in  his  physical  body,  everything  in  it  being  kept 
as  on  the  last  day  of  his  life,  the  calendar  on  the  wall  reading  July  4,  1902. 

On  December  19,  1900,  he  wrote  to  an  American  disciple:  “Verily  I  am  a 
bird  of  passage.  Gay  and  busy  Paris,  grim  old  Constantinople,  sparkling  little 
Athens,  and  pyramidal  Cairo  are  left  behind,  and  here  I  am  writing  in  my  room 
on  the  Ganges,  in  the  Math.  It  is  so  quiet  and  still!  The  broad  river  is  dancing 
in  the  bright  sunshine,  only  now  and  then  an  occasional  cargo  boat  breaking 
the  silence  with  the  splashing  of  the  waves.  It  is  the  cold  season  here,  but  the 
middle  of  the  day  is  warm  and  bright  every  day.  It  is  like  the  winter  of  southern 
California.  Everything  is  green  and  gold,  and  the  grass  is  like  velvet,  yet  the  air 
is  cold  and  crisp  and  delightful.” 

After  the  Swami’s  return  from  East  Bengal  he  lived  a  relaxed  life  in  the 
monastery,  surrounded  by  his  pet  animals:  the  dog  Bagha,  the  she-goat  Hansi, 


168 


Vivekananda 


an  antelope,  a  stork,  several  cows  and  sheep  and  ducks  and  geese,  and  a  kid 
called  Matru  who  was  adorned  with  a  collar  of  little  bells,  and  with  whom  the 
Swami  ran  and  played  like  a  child.  The  animals  adored  him;  Matru,  the  little 
kid,  who  had  been — so  he  pretended — a  relation  of  his  in  a  previous  existence, 
slept  in  his  room.  When  it  died  he  grieved  like  a  child  and  said  to  a  disciple: 
“How  strange!  Whomsoever  I  love  dies  early.”  Before  milking  Hansi  for  his 
tea,  he  always  asked  her  permission.  Bagha,  who  took  part  in  the  Hindu  cere¬ 
monies,  went  to  bathe  in  the  Ganges  with  the  devotees  on  sacred  occasions, 
as  for  instance  when  the  gongs  and  conchs  announced  the  end  of  an  eclipse. 
He  was,  in  a  sense,  the  leader  of  the  group  of  animals  at  the  Math.  After  his 
death  he  was  given  a  burial  in  the  grounds  of  the  monastery. 

Referring  to  his  pet  animals  he  wrote  to  an  American  disciple  on  September  7, 
1901:  “The  rains  have  come  down  in  right  earnest,  and  it  is  a  deluge — pouring, 
pouring,  pouring,  night  and  day.  The  river  is  rising,  flooding  the  banks;  the 
ponds  and  tanks  have  overflowed.  I  have  just  now  returned  from  lending  a  hand 
in  cutting  a  deep  drain  to  take  off  the  water  from  the  Math  grounds.  The  rain¬ 
water  stands  at  places  some  feet  deep.  My  huge  stork  is  full  of  glee  and  so  are 
the  ducks  and  geese.  My  tame  antelope  fled  from  the  Math  and  gave  us  some 
days  of  anxiety  in  finding  him  out.  One  of  my  ducks  unfortunately  died  yester¬ 
day.  She  had  been  gasping  for  breath  more  than  a  week.  One  of  my  waggish 
old  monks  says,  'Sir,  it  is  no  use  living  in  the  Kaliyuga,  when  ducks  catch  cold 
from  damp  and  rain,  and  frogs  sneeze'/  One  of  the  geese  had  her  plumes  falling 
off.  Knowing  no  other  method  of  treatment,  I  left  her  some  minutes  in  a  tub 
of  water  mixed  with  mild  carbolic,  so  that  it  might  either  kill  or  heal — and  she 
is  all  right  now.” 

Thus  Swami  Vivekananda  tried  to  lead  a  carefree  life  at  the  monastery,  some¬ 
times  going  about  the  grounds  clad  in  his  loin-cloth,  sometimes  supervising  the 
cooking  arrangements  and  himself  preparing  some  delicacies  for  the  inmates, 
and  sometimes  joining  his  disciples  and  brother  monks  in  the  singing  of  devo¬ 
tional  music.  At  other  times  he  imparted  spiritual  instruction  to  the  visitors, 
or  engaged  in  deep  thought  whenever  his  inner  spirit  was  stirred  up,  occupied 
himself  with  serious  study  in  his  room,  or  explained  to  the  members  of  the 
Math  the  intricate  passages  of  the  scriptures  and  unfolded  to  them  his  scheme 
of  future  work. 

Though  his  body  was  wearing  away  day  by  day,  his  mind  was  luminous.  At 
times  his  eyes  assumed  a  far-away  look,  showing  how  tired  he  was  of  the  world. 
One  day  he  said,  “For  one  thing  we  may  be  grateful:  this  life  is  not  eternal.” 

The  illness  did  not  show  any  sign  of  abatement,  but  that  did  not  dampen 
his  spirit  to  work.  When  urged  to  rest,  he  said  to  a  disciple:  “My  son,  there  is 
no  rest  for  me.  That  which  Sri  Ramakrishna  called  ‘Kali’  took  possession  of 
my  body  and  soul  three  or  four  days  before  his  passing  away.  That  makes  me 
work  and  work  and  never  lets  me  keep  still  or  look  to  my  personal  comfort.” 
Then  he  told  the  disciple  how  the  Master,  before  his  passing  away,  had  trans¬ 
mitted  his  spiritual  power  to  him.41 

During  the  later  part  of  1901  the  Swami  observed  all  the  religious  festivals 

41  See  p.  34. 


Vivekananda 


169 


at  the  Math.  The  Divine  Mother  was  worshipped  in  strict  orthodox  fashion  dur¬ 
ing  the  Durga-puja,  Lakshmi-puja,  and  Kali-puja.  On  the  occasion  of  the  Durga- 
puja  the  poor  were  given  a  sumptuous  feast.  Thus  the  Swami  demonstrated 
the  efficacy  of  religious  rituals  in  the  development  of  the  spiritual  life.  In 
February  1902  the  birth  anniversary  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  was  celebrated  at  the 
Belur  Math,  and  over  thirty  thousand  devotees  gathered  for  the  occasion.  But 
the  Swami  was  feverish.  He  was  confined  to  his  room  by  the  swelling  of  his 
legs.  From  the  windows  he  watched  the  dancing  and  the  music  of  the  devotees. 

To  the  disciple  who  was  attending  him  the  Swami  said:  “He  who  has  realized 
the  Atman  becomes  a  storehouse  of  great  power.  From  him  as  the  centre  a 
spiritual  force  emanates,  working  within  a  certain  radius;  people  who  come 
within  this  circle  become  inspired  with  his  ideas  and  are  overwhelmed  by  them. 
Thus  without  much  religious  striving  they  derive  benefit  from  the  spiritual 
experience  of  an  illumined  person.  This  is  called  grace." 

“Blessed  are  those,"  the  Swami  continued,  “who  have  seen  Sri  Ramakrishna. 
All  of  you,  too,  will  get  his  vision.  When  you  have  come  here,  you  are  very 
near  to  him.  Nobody  has  been  able  to  understand  him  who  came  on  earth  as 
Sri  Ramakrishna.  Even  his  own  nearest  devotees  have  no  real  clue  to  it.  Only 
some  have  a  little  inkling  of  it.  All  will  understand  in  time." 

It  is  said  that  the  spot  immediately  beneath  a  lamp  is  dark.  And  so  it  was 
that  the  orthodox  people  of  the  neighbouring  villages  hardly  understood  the 
ideas  and  ideals  of  the  Belur  Math.  The  monks  there  did  not  in  all  respects  lead 
the  life  of  orthodox  sannyasins.  Devotees  from  abroad  frequented  the  mon¬ 
astery.  In  matters  of  food  and  dress  the  inmates  were  liberal.  Thus  they  became 
the  butt  of  criticism.  The  villagers  invented  scandals  about  them  and  the  pas¬ 
sengers  on  the  boats  passing  along  the  Ganges  would  point  out  the  monastery 
with  an  accusing  finger. 

When  the  Swami  heard  all  this  he  said:  “That  is  good.  It  is  a  law  of  nature. 
That  is  the  way  with  all  founders  of  religion.  Without  persecution  superior  ideas 
cannot  penetrate  into  the  heart  of  society." 

But  the  criticism  of  the  neighbours  in  time  gave  place  to  pride  in  having  in 
their  midst  so  many  saintly  souls. 

Many  distinguished  Indians  used  to  visit  the  Swami  at  this  time.  With  some 
of  them  he  discussed  the  idea  of  founding  a  Vedic  Institution  for  the  promotion 
of  the  ancient  Aryan  culture  and  the  knowledge  of  Sanskrit.  This  was  one  of 
the  Swami’s  favourite  thoughts,  on  which  he  dwelt  even  on  the  last  day  of  his 
life  on  earth. 

Towards  the  end  of  1901  two  learned  Buddhists  from  Japan  came  to  the  Belur 
Math  to  induce  the  Swami  to  attend  a  Congress  of  Religions  that  was  being  con¬ 
templated  in  Japan  at  that  time.  One  of  them  was  the  famous  artist  and  art  critic 
Okakura,  and  the  other  Oda,  the  abbot  of  a  Buddhist  monastery.  The  Swami 
became  particularly  fond  of  Okakura  and  said,  “We  are  two  brothers  who  meet 
again,  having  come  from  the  ends  of  the  earth."  Though  pressed  by  the  visitors, 
he  could  not  accept  the  invitation  to  go  to  Japan,  partly  because  of  his  failing 
health  and  partly  because  he  was  sceptical  that  the  Japanese  would  appreciate 
the  monastic  ideal  of  the  Non-dualistic  Vedanta.  In  a  letter  to  a  Western  lady 
written  in  June  1902,  the  Swami  made  the  following  interesting  observation 


170  Vivekananda 

about  the  connexion  between  the  monastic  ideal  and  fidelity  in  married  life: 

In  my  opinion,  a  race  must  first  cultivate  a  great  respect  for  motherhood,  through  the 
sanctification  and  inviolability  of  marriage,  before  it  can  attain  to  the  ideal  of  perfect 
chastity.  The  Roman  Catholics  and  the  Hindus,  holding  marriage  sacred  and  inviolate, 
have  produced  great  chaste  men  and  women  of  immense  power.  To  the  Arab,  marriage 
is  a  contract  or  a  forceful  possession,  to  be  dissolved  at  will,  and  we  do  not  find  there 
the  development  of  the  idea  of  the  virgin  or  the  brahmacharin.  Modern  Buddhism — 
having  fallen  among  races  who  had  not  yet  come  up  to  the  evolution  of  marriage — has 
made  a  travesty  of  monasticism.  So  until  there  is  developed  in  Japan  a  great  and  sacred 
ideal  about  marriage  (apart  from  mutual  attraction  and  love),  I  do  not  see  how  there 
can  be  great  monks  and  nuns.  As  you  have  come  to  see  that  the  glory  of  life  is  chastity, 
so  my  eyes  also  have  been  opened  to  the  necessity  of  this  great  sanctification  for  the  vast 
majority,  in  order  that  a  few  lifelong  chaste  powers  may  be  produced. 

The  Swami  used  to  say  that  absolute  loyalty  and  devotion  between  husbands 
and  wives  for  three  successive  generations  find  their  expression  in  the  birth  of 
an  ideal  monk. 

Okakura  earnestly  requested  the  Swami  to  accompany  him  on  a  visit  to  Bodh- 
Gaya,  where  Buddha  had  attained  illumination.  Taking  advantage  of  several 
weeks’  respite  from  his  ailment,  the  Swami  accepted  the  invitation.  He  also 
desired  to  see  Benares.  The  trip  lasted  through  January  and  February  1902, 
and  was  a  fitting  end  to  all  his  wanderings.  He  arrived  at  Bodh-Gaya  on  the 
morning  of  his  last  birthday  and  was  received  with  genuine  courtesy  and  hos¬ 
pitality  by  the  orthodox  Hindu  monk  in  charge  of  the  temple.  This  and  the 
similar  respect  and  affection  shown  by  the  priests  in  Benares  proved  the  extent 
of  his  influence  over  men’s  hearts.  It  may  be  remembered  that  Bodh-Gaya  had 
been  the  first  of  the  holy  places  he  had  visited  during  Sri  Ramakrishna’s  life¬ 
time.  And  some  years  later,  when  he  was  still  an  unknown  monk,  he  had  said 
farewell  to  Benares  with  the  words:  “Till  that  day  when  I  fall  on  society  like 
a  thunderbolt  I  shall  visit  this  place  no  more.” 

In  Benares  the  Swami  was  offered  a  sum  of  money  by  a  Maharaja  to  establish 
a  monastery  there.  He  accepted  the  offer  and,  on  his  return  to  Calcutta,  sent 
Swami  Shivananda  to  organize  the  work.  Even  before  Swami  Vivekananda’s 
visit  to  Benares,  several  young  men,  under  the  Swami’s  inspiration,  had  started 
a  small  organization  for  the  purpose  of  providing  destitute  pilgrims  with  food, 
shelter,  and  medical  aid.  Delighted  with  their  unselfish  spirit,  the  Swami  said 
to  them:  “You  have  the  true  spirit,  my  boys,  and  you  will  always  have  my  love 
and  blessings!  Go  on  bravely;  never  mind  your  poverty.  Money  will  come.  A 
great  thing  will  grow  out  of  it,  surpassing  your  fondest  hopes.”  The  Swami 
wrote  the  appeal  which  was  published  with  the  first  report  of  the  “Ramakrishna 
Home  of  Service,”  as  the  institution  came  to  be  called.  In  later  years  it  became 
the  premier  institution  of  its  kind  started  by  the  Ramakrishna  Mission. 

The  Swami  returned  from  Benares.  But  hardly  had  he  arrived  at  Belur  when 
his  illness  showed  signs  of  aggravation  in  the  damp  air  of  Bengal.  During  the 
last  year  and  a  half  of  his  life  he  was,  off  and  on,  under  the  strict  supervision 
of  his  physicians.  Diabetes  took  the  form  of  dropsy.  His  feet  swelled  and  certain 
parts  of  his  body  became  hypersensitive.  He  could  hardly  close  his  eyes  in  sleep. 


Vivekananda 


171 


A  native  physician  made  him  follow  a  very  strict  regime:  he  had  to  avoid  water 
and  salt.  For  twenty-one  days  he  did  not  allow  a  drop  of  water  to  pass  through 
his  throat.  To  a  disciple  he  said:  “The  body  is  only  a  tool  of  the  mind.  What 
the  mind  dictates  the  body  will  have  to  obey.  Now  I  do  not  even  think  of  water. 
I  do  not  miss  it  at  all.  ...  I  see  I  can  do  anything." 

Though  his  body  was  subjected  to  a  devitalizing  illness,  his  mind  retained 
its  usual  vigour.  During  this  period  he  was  seen  reading  the  newly  published 
Encyclopaedia  Britannica.  One  of  his  householder  disciples  remarked  that  it 
was  difficult  to  master  these  twenty-five  volumes  in  one  life.  But  the  Swami 
had  already  finished  ten  volumes  and  was  busy  reading  the  eleventh.  He  told 
the  disciple  to  ask  him  any  question  from  the  ten  volumes  he  had  read,  and 
to  the  latter’s  utter  amazement  the  Swami  not  only  displayed  his  knowledge  of 
many  technical  subjects  but  even  quoted  the  language  of  the  book  here  and 
there.  He  explained  to  the  disciple  that  there  was  nothing  miraculous  about  it. 
A  man  who  observed  strict  chastity  in  thought  and  action,  he  declared,  could 
develop  the  retentive  power  of  the  mind  and  reproduce  exactly  what  he  had 
heard  or  read  but  once,  even  years  before. 

The  regeneration  of  India  was  the  ever  recurring  theme  of  the  Swami’s 
thought.  Two  of  the  projects  dear  to  his  heart  were  the  establishment  of  a 
Vedic  College  and  a  convent  for  women.  The  latter  was  to  be  started  on  the 
bank  of  the  Ganges  under  the  direction  of  the  Holy  Mother  and  was  to  be 
completely  separated  from  the  Belur  Monastery.  The  teachers  trained  in  the 
convent  were  to  take  charge  of  the  education  of  Indian  women  along  national 
lines. 

But  the  Swami’s  heart  always  went  out  in  sympathy  for  the  poor  and  neg¬ 
lected  masses.  During  the  later  part  of  1901  a  number  of  Sonthal  labourers 
were  engaged  in  digging  the  grounds  about  the  monastery.  They  were  poor  and 
outside  the  pale  of  society.  The  Swami  felt  an  especial  joy  in  talking  to  them, 
and  listened  to  the  accounts  of  their  misery  with  great  compassion.  One  day 
he  arranged  a  feast  for  them  and  served  them  with  delicacies  that  they  had 
never  before  tasted.  Then,  when  the  meal  was  finished,  the  Swami  said  to  them: 
“You  are  Narayanas.  Today  I  have  entertained  the  Lord  Himself  by  feeding 
you.’’ 

He  said  to  a  disciple:  “I  actually  saw  God  in  them.  How  guileless  they  are!’’ 

Afterwards  he  said,  addressing  the  inmates  of  the  Belur  Math: 

“See  how  simple-hearted  these  poor,  illiterate  people  are!  Will  you  be  able  to 
relieve  their  miseries  to  some  extent  at  least?  Otherwise  of  what  use  is  our 
wearing  the  ochre  robe  of  the  sannyasin?  To  be  able  to  sacrifice  everything  for 
the  good  of  others  is  real  monasticism.  Sometimes  I  think  within  myself:  'What 
is  the  good  of  building  monasteries  and  so  forth?  Why  not  sell  them  and  dis¬ 
tribute  the  money  among  the  poor,  indigent  Narayanas?  What  homes  should  we 
care  for,  we  who  have  made  the  tree  our  shelter?  Alas!  How  can  we  have  the 
heart  to  put  a  morsel  into  our  mouths,  when  our  countrymen  have  not  enough 
wherewith  to  feed  or  clothe  themselves?  .  .  .  Mother,  shall  there  be  no  redress 
for  them?’  One  of  the  purposes  of  my  going  out  to  preach  religion  to  the  West, 
as  you  know,  was  to  see  if  I  could  find  any  means  of  providing  for  the  people 
of  my  country.  Seeing  their  poverty  and  distress,  I  think  sometimes:  'Let  us 


172 


Vivekananda 


throw  away  all  the  paraphernalia  of  worship — blowing  the  conch  and  ringing 
the  bell  and  waving  the  lights  before  the  image.  .  .  .  Let  us  throw  away  all 
pride  of  learning  and  study  of  the  scriptures  and  all  spiritual  disciplines  for  the 
attainment  of  personal  liberation.  Let  us  go  from  village  to  village,  devoting 
ourselves  to  the  service  of  the  poor.  Let  us,  through  the  force  of  our  character 
and  spirituality  and  our  austere  living,  convince  the  rich  about  their  duties  to 
the  masses,  and  get  money  and  the  means  wherewith  to  serve  the  poor  and  the 
distressed.  .  .  .  Alas!  Nobody  in  our  country  thinks  for  the  low,  the  poor, 
the  miserable!  Those  who  are  the  backbone  of  the  nation,  whose  labour  pro¬ 
duces  food,  those  whose  one  day’s  absence  from  work  raises  a  cry  of  general 
distress  in  the  city — where  is  the  man  in  our  country  who  sympathizes  with 
them,  who  shares  in  their  joys  and  sorrows?  Look  how,  for  want  of  sympathy 
on  the  part  of  the  Hindus,  thousands  of  pariahs  are  becoming  Christians  in  the 
Madras  Presidency!  Don’t  think  that  it  is  merely  the  pinch  of  hunger  that 
drives  them  to  embrace  Christianity.  It  is  simply  because  they  do  not  get 
your  sympathy.  You  are  continually  telling  them:  ‘Don’t  touch  me,’  ‘Don’t 
touch  this  or  that!’  Is  there  any  fellow-feeling  or  sense  of  dharma  left  in 
the  country?  There  is  only  ‘Don’t-touchism’  now!  Kick  out  all  such  degrad¬ 
ing  usages!  How  I  wish  to  abolish  the  barriers  of  ‘Don’t-touchism’  and  go 
out  and  bring  together  one  and  all,  crying:  ‘Come,  all  ye  that  are  poor  and 
destitute,  fallen  and  downtrodden!  We  are  one  in  the  name  of  Ramakrishna!’ 
Unless  they  are  elevated,  the  Great  Mother  India  will  never  awake!  What  are 
we  good  for  if  we  cannot  provide  facilities  for  their  food  and  clothing?  Alas, 
they  are  ignorant  of  the  ways  of  the  world  and  hence  fail  to  eke  out  a  living 
though  labouring  hard  day  and  night  for  it.  Gather  all  your  forces  together 
to  remove  the  veil  from  their  eyes.  What  I  see  clear  as  daylight  is  that  the  same 
Brahman,  the  same  Sakti,  is  in  them  as  in  me!  Only  there  is  a  difference  in 
the  degree  of  manifestation — that  is  all.  Have  you  ever  seen  a  country  in  the 
whole  history  of  the  world  rise  unless  there  was  a  uniform  circulation  of  the 
national  blood  all  over  the  body?  Know  for  certain  that  not  much  can  be  done 
with  that  body  one  limb  of  which  is  paralysed,  even  though  the  other  limbs  are 
healthy.” 

One  of  the  lay  disciples  pointed  out  the  difficulty  of  establishing  unity  and 
harmony  among  the  diverse  sects  in  India.  Vivekananda  replied  with  irritation: 

“Don’t  come  here  any  more  if  you  think  any  task  too  difficult.  Through  the 
grace  of  the  Lord,  everything  becomes  easy  of  achievement.  Your  duty  is  to 
serve  the  poor  and  the  distressed  without  distinction  of  caste  and  creed.  What 
business  have  you  to  consider  the  fruits  of  your  action?  Your  duty  is  to  go  on 
working,  and  everything  will  set  itself  right  in  time,  and  work  by  itself.  My 
method  of  work  is  to  construct,  and  not  to  destroy  that  which  is  already  exist¬ 
ing.  .  .  .  You  are  all  intelligent  boys  and  profess  to  be  my  disciples — tell  me 
what  you  have  done.  Couldn’t  you  give  away  one  life  for  the  sake  of  others? 
Let  the  reading  of  Vedanta  and  the  practice  of  meditation  and  the  like  be  left 
for  the  next  life!  Let  this  body  go  in  the  service  of  others — and  then  I  shall 
know  you  have  not  come  to  me  in  vain!” 

A  little  later  he  said:  “After  so  much  tapasya,  austerity,  I  have  known  that 
the  highest  truth  is  this:  ‘He  is  present  in  all  beings.  These  are  all  the  mani- 


Vivekananda  173 

fested  forms  of  Him.  There  is  no  other  God  to  seek  for!  He  alone  is  worshipping 
God,  who  serves  all  beings/  ” 

In  this  exhortation  is  found  Vivekananda’s  message  in  all  its  vividness.  These 
words  are  addressed  to  India  and  the  Western  world  alike.  The  West,  too,  has 
its  pariahs.  He  who  exploits  another  man,  near  or  distant,  offends  God  and 
will  pay  for  it  sooner  or  later.  All  men  are  sons  of  the  same  God,  all  bear  within 
them  the  same  God.  He  who  wishes  to  serve  God  must  serve  man — and  in  the 
first  instance,  man  in  the  humblest,  poorest,  most  degraded  form.  Only  by 
breaking  down  the  barriers  between  man  and  man  can  one  usher  in  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  on  earth. 

There  were  moments  when  Vivekananda  felt  gloomy.  His  body  was  wasting 
away,  and  only  a  few  young  men  came  forward  to  help  him  in  his  work.  He 
wanted  more  of  them  who,  fired  with  indomitable  faith  in  God  and  in  them¬ 
selves,  would  renounce  everything  for  the  welfare  of  others.  He  used  to  say  that 
with  a  dozen  such  people  he  could  divert  into  a  new  channel  the  whole  thought- 
current  of  the  country.  Disregarding  his  physical  suffering,  he  constantly  inspired 
his  disciples  to  cultivate  this  new  faith. 

Thus  we  see  him,  one  day,  seated  on  a  canvas  cot  under  the  mango  tree  in 
the  courtyard  of  the  monastery.  Sannyasins  and  brahmacharins  about  him  were 
busy  doing  their  daily  duties.  One  was  sweeping  the  courtyard  with  a  big  broom. 
Swami  Premananda,  after  his  bath,  was  climbing  the  steps  to  the  shrine.  Sud¬ 
denly  Swami  Vivekananda’s  eyes  became  radiant.  Shaking  with  emotion,  he 
said  to  a  disciple: 

“Where  will  you  go  to  seek  Brahman?  He  is  immanent  in  all  beings.  Here, 
here  is  the  visible  Brahman!  Shame  on  those  who,  neglecting  the  visible 
Brahman,  set  their  minds  on  other  things!  Here  is  the  visible  Brahman  before 
you  as  tangible  as  a  fruit  in  one’s  hand!  Can’t  you  see?  Here — here — here  is 
Brahman!” 

These  words  struck  those  around  him  with  a  kind  of  electric  shock.  For  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  they  remained  glued  to  the  spot,  as  if  petrified.  The  broom 
in  the  hand  of  the  sweeper  stopped.  Premananda  fell  into  a  trance.  Everyone 
experienced  an  indescribable  peace.  At  last  the  Swami  said  to  Premananda, 
“Now  go  to  worship.” 

The  brother  disciples  tried  to  restrain  the  Swami’s  activities,  especially  instruc¬ 
tion  to  visitors  and  seekers.  But  he  was  unyielding.  “Look  here!”  he  said  to 
them  one  day.  “What  good  is  this  body?  Let  it  go  in  helping  others.  Did  not 
the  Master  preach  until  the  very  end?  And  shall  I  not  do  the  same?  I  do  not 
care  a  straw  if  the  body  goes.  You  cannot  imagine  how  happy  I  am  when  I  find 
earnest  seekers  after  truth  to  talk  to.  In  the  work  of  waking  up  Atman  in  my 
fellow  men  I  shall  gladly  die  again  and  again!” 

Till  the  very  end  the  Swami  remained  the  great  leader  of  the  monastery, 
guiding  with  a  firm  hand  the  details  of  its  daily  life,  in  spite  of  his  own  suffering. 
He  insisted  upon  thorough  cleanliness  and  examined  the  beds  to  see  that  they 
were  aired  and  properly  taken  care  of.  He  drew  up  a  weekly  time-table  and  saw 
that  it  was  scrupulously  observed.  The  classes  on  the  Vedas  and  the  Puranas  were 
held  daily,  he  himself  conducting  them  when  his  health  permitted.  He  dis- 


Vivekananda 


174 

couraged  too  much  ritualism  in  the  chapel.  He  warned  the  monks  against 
exaggerated  sentimentalism  and  narrow  sectarianism. 

But  the  leader  kept  a  stern  watch  on  the  practice  of  daily  meditation  on  the 
part  of  the  inmates  of  the  monastery.  The  bell  sounded  at  fixed  hours  for  meals, 
study,  discussion,  and  meditation.  About  three  months  before  his  death  he 
made  it  a  rule  that  at  four  o’clock  in  the  morning  a  hand-bell  should  be  rung 
from  room  to  room  to  awaken  the  monks.  Within  half  an  hour  all  should  be 
gathered  in  the  chapel  to  meditate.  But  he  was  always  before  them.  He  got  up 
at  three  and  went  to  the  chapel,  where  he  sat  facing  the  north,  meditating 
motionless  for  more  than  two  hours.  No  one  was  allowed  to  leave  his  seat  before 
the  Swami  set  the  example.  As  he  got  up,  he  chanted  softly,  “Siva!  Siva!” 
Bowing  to  the  image  of  Sri  Ramakrishna,  he  would  go  downstairs  and  pace  the 
courtyard,  singing  a  song  about  the  Divine  Mother  or  Siva.  Naturally  his  presence 
in  the  chapel  created  an  intense  spiritual  atmosphere.  Swami  Brahmananda 
said:  “Ah!  One  at  once  becomes  absorbed  if  one  sits  for  meditation  in  company 
with  Naren!  I  do  not  feel  this  when  I  sit  alone.” 

Once,  after  an  absence  of  several  days  on  account  of  illness,  he  entered  the 
chapel  and  found  only  two  monks  there.  He  became  annoyed;  in  order  to  disci¬ 
pline  the  absentees  he  forbade  them  to  eat  their  meals  at  the  monastery.  They 
had  to  go  out  and  beg  their  food.  He  did  not  spare  anyone,  even  a  beloved 
brother  disciple  for  whom  he  cherished  the  highest  respect  and  who  happened 
to  be  absent  from  the  chapel  that  morning. 

Another  day,  he  found  a  brother  disciple,  Swami  Shivananda,  in  bed  at  the 
hour  of  meditation.  He  said  to  the  latter:  “Brother!  I  know  you  do  not  need 
meditation.  You  have  already  realized  the  highest  goal  through  the  grace  of 
Sri  Ramakrishna.  But  you  should  daily  meditate  with  the  youngsters  in  order 
to  set  an  example  to  them.” 

From  that  day  on,  Shivananda,  whether  ill  or  well,  always  communed  with 
God  during  the  early  hours  of  the  morning.  In  his  old  age,  when  it  became 
physically  impossible  for  him  to  go  to  the  chapel,  he  used  to  sit  on  his  bed  for 
meditation. 

But  the  Swami,  preoccupied  as  he  was  with  the  training  of  his  Indian  dis¬ 
ciples,  never  forgot  his  Western  ones.  Their  welfare,  too,  was  always  in  his 
thought  and  prayer. 

To  Miss  MacLeod  he  wrote  on  June  14,  1901: 

Well,  Joe,  keep  health  and  spirits  up.  .  .  .  Gloiie  et  hon neur  await  you — and  mukti. 
The  natural  ambition  of  woman  is,  through  marriage,  to  climb  up  leaning  upon  a  man; 
but  those  days  are  gone.  You  shall  be  great  without  the  help  of  any  man,  just  as  you  are, 
plain,  dear  Joe — our  Joe,  everlasting  Joe.  .  .  . 

We  have  seen  enough  of  this  life  not  to  care  for  any  of  its  bubbles,  have  we  not,  Joe? 
For  months  I  have  been  practising  to  drive  away  all  sentiments;  therefore  I  stop  here, 
and  good-bye  just  now.  It  was  ordained  by  Mother  that  we  should  work  together;  it  has 
been  already  for  the  good  of  many;  it  shall  be  for  the  good  of  many  more.  So  let  it  be.  It 
is  useless  planning  useless  high  flights;  Mother  will  find  her  own  way  .  .  .  rest  assured. 

To  Mary  Hale,  on  August  27,  1901,  he  wrote  with  his  usual  wit: 

I  would  that  my  health  were  what  you  expected — at  least  to  be  able  to  write  you  a 


Vivekananda  175 

long  letter.  It  is  getting  worse,  in  fact,  every  day — and  so  many  complications  and 
botherations  without  that,  I  have  ceased  to  notice  it  at  all. 

I  wish  you  all  joy  in  your  lovely  Suisse  chalet — splendid  health,  good  appetite,  and  a 
light  study  of  Swiss  or  other  antiquities  just  to  liven  things  up  a  bit.  I  am  so  glad  that 
you  are  breathing  the  free  air  of  the  mountains,  but  sorry  that  Sam  is  not  in  the  best  of 
health.  Well,  there  is  no  anxiety  about  it;  he  has  naturally  such  a  fine  physique. 

Woman  s  moods  and  man’s  luck — the  gods  themselves  do  not  know,  not  to  speak  of 
men.  My  instincts  may  be  very  feminine — but  what  I  am  exercised  with  just  this 
moment  is  that  you  get  a  little  bit  of  manliness  about  you.  Oh!  Mary,  your  brain,  health, 
beauty,  everything,  is  going  to  waste  just  for  the  lack  of  that  one  essential — assertion  of 
individuality.  Your  haughtiness,  spirit,  etc.  are  all  nonsense — only  mockery.  You  are  at 
best  a  boarding-school  girl — no  backbone!  no  backbone! 

Alas!  this  life-long  leading-string  business!  This  is  very  harsh,  very  brutal — but  I  can’t 
help  it.  I  love  you,  Mary — sincerely,  genuinely.  I  can’t  cheat  you  with  namby-pamby 
sugar  candies.  Nor  do  they  ever  come  to  me. 

Then  again,  I  am  a  dying  man;  I  have  no  time  to  fool  in.  Wake  up,  girl!  I  expect  now 
from  you  letters  of  the  right  slashing  order.  Give  it  right  straight — I  need  a  good  deal  of 
rousing.  .  .  . 

I  am  in  a  sense  a  retired  man.  I  don’t  keep  much  note  of  what  is  going  on  about  the 
Movement.  Then  the  Movement  is  getting  bigger  and  it  is  impossible  for  one  man  to 
know  all  about  it  minutely.  I  now  do  nothing — except  try  to  eat  and  sleep  and  nurse  my 
body  the  rest  of  the  time. 

Good-bye,  dear  Mary.  Hope  we  shall  meet  again  somewhere  in  this  life — but  meeting 
or  no  meeting,  I  remain  ever  your  loving  brother,  Vivekananda. 

To  his  beloved  disciple  Nivedita  he  wrote  on  February  12,  1902:  “May  all 
powers  come  unto  you!  May  Mother  Herself  be  your  hands  and  mind!  It  is 
immense  power — irresistible — that  I  pray  for  you,  and,  if  possible,  along  with 
it  infinite  peace.  .  .  . 

“If  there  was  any  truth  in  Sri  Ramakrishna,  may  He  take  you  into  His  leading, 
even  as  He  did  me,  nay,  a  thousand  times  more!” 

And  again,  to  Miss  MacLeod:  “I  can’t,  even  in  imagination,  pay  the  immense 
debt  of  gratitude  I  owe  you.  Wherever  you  are  you  never  forget  my  welfare; 
and  there,  you  are  the  only  one  that  bears  all  my  burdens,  all  my  brutal  out¬ 
bursts.  .  . 

MAHASAMADHI 

The  sun,  enveloped  in  a  golden  radiance,  was  fast  descending  to  the  horizon. 
The  last  two  months  of  the  Swami’s  life  on  earth  had  been  full  of  events  fore¬ 
shadowing  the  approaching  end.  Yet  few  had  thought  the  end  so  near. 

Soon  after  his  return  from  Benares  the  Swami  greatly  desired  to  see  his 
sannyasin  disciples  and  he  wrote  to  them  to  come  to  the  Belur  Math,  even  if 
only  for  a  short  time.  “Many  of  his  disciples  from  distant  parts  of  the  world,” 
writes  Sister  Nivedita,  “gathered  round  the  Swami.  Ill  as  he  looked,  there  was 
none  probably  who  suspected  how  near  the  end  had  come.  Yet  visits  were  paid 
and  farewells  exchanged  that  it  had  needed  voyages  half  round  the  world  to 
make.” 

More  and  more  the  Swami  was  seen  to  free  himself  from  all  responsibilities, 
leaving  the  work  to  other  hands.  “How  often,”  he  said,  “does  a  man  ruin  his 
disciples  by  remaining  always  with  them!  When  men  are  once  trained,  it  is 


176 


Vivekananda 


essential  that  their  leader  leave  them,  for  without  his  absence  they  cannot 
develop  themselves."  “Plants,”  he  had  said  some  time  before,  “always  remain 
small  under  a  big  tree.”  Yet  the  near  and  dear  ones  thought  that  he  would 
certainly  live  three  or  four  years  more. 

He  refused  to  express  any  opinion  on  the  questions  of  the  day.  “I  can  no 
more  enter  into  outside  affairs,”  he  said;  “I  am  already  on  the  way.”  On  another 
occasion  he  said:  “You  may  be  right;  but  I  cannot  enter  any  more  into  these 
matters.  I  am  going  down  into  death.”  News  of  the  world  met  with  but  a  far¬ 
away  rejoinder  from  him. 

On  May  15,  1902,  he  wrote  to  Miss  MacLeod,  perhaps  for  the  last  time: 
“I  am  somewhat  better,  but  of  course  far  from  what  I  expected.  A  great  idea 
of  quiet  has  come  upon  me.  I  am  going  to  retire  for  good — no  more  work  for 
me.  If  possible,  I  will  revert  to  my  old  days  of  begging.  All  blessings  attend  you, 
Joe;  you  have  been  a  good  angel  to  me.” 

But  it  was  difficult  for  him  to  give  up  what  had  been  dearer  to  him  than  his 
life:  the  work.  On  the  last  Sunday  before  the  end  he  said  to  one  of  his  disciples: 
“You  know  the  work  is  always  my  weak  point.  When  I  think  that  might  come 
to  an  end,  I  am  all  undone.”  He  could  easily  withdraw  from  weakness  and 
attachment,  but  the  work  still  retained  its  power  to  move  him. 

Sri  Ramakrishna  and  the  Divine  Mother  preoccupied  his  mind.  He  acted  as 
if  he  were  the  child  of  the  Mother  or  the  boy  playing  at  the  feet  of  Sri  Rama¬ 
krishna  at  Dakshineswar.  He  said,  “A  great  tapasya  and  meditation  has  come 
upon  me,  and  I  am  making  ready  for  death.” 

His  disciples  and  spiritual  brothers  were  worried  to  see  his  contemplative 
mood.  They  remembered  the  words  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  that  Naren,  after  his 
mission  was  completed,  would  merge  for  ever  into  samadhi,  and  that  he  would 
refuse  to  live  in  his  physical  body  if  he  realized  who  he  was.  A  brother  monk 
asked  him  one  day,  quite  casually,  “Do  you  know  yet  who  you  are?”  The  unex¬ 
pected  reply,  “Yes,  I  now  know!”  awed  into  silence  everyone  present.  No  further 
question  was  asked.  All  remembered  the  story  of  the  great  nirvikalpa  samadhi 
of  Naren’s  youth,  and  how,  when  it  was  over,  Sri  Ramakrishna  had  said:  “Now 
the  Mother  has  shown  you  everything.  But  this  realization,  like  the  jewel  locked 
in  a  box,  will  be  hidden  away  from  you  and  kept  in  my  custody.  I  will  keep  the 
key  with  me.  Only  after  you  have  fulfilled  your  mission  on  this  earth  will  the 
box  be  unlocked,  and  you  will  know  everything  as  you  have  known  now.” 

They  also  remembered  that  in  the  cave  of  Amarnath,  in  the  summer  of  1898, 
he  had  received  the  grace  of  Siva — not  to  die  till  he  himself  should  will  to  do  so. 
He  was  looking  death  in  the  face  unafraid  as  it  drew  near. 

Everything  about  the  Swami  in  these  days  was  deliberate  and  significant,  yet 
none  could  apprehend  its  true  import.  People  were  deceived  by  his  outer  cheer¬ 
fulness.  From  the  beginning  of  June  he  appeared  to  be  regaining  his  health. 

One  day,  about  a  week  before  the  end,  he  bade  a  disciple  bring  him  the 
Bengali  almanac.  He  was  seen  several  times  on  subsequent  days  studying  the 
book  intently,  as  if  he  was  undecided  about  something  he  wanted  to  know. 
After  the  passing  away,  the  brother  monks  and  disciples  realized  that  he  had 
been  debating  about  the  day  when  he  should  throw  away  the  mortal  body. 
Ramakrishna,  too,  had  consulted  the  almanac  before  his  death. 


Vivekananda 


177 


Three  days  before  the  mahasamadhi,  Vivekananda  pointed  out  to  Swami 
Premananda  a  particular  spot  on  the  monastery  grounds  where  he  wished  his 
body  to  be  cremated. 

On  Wednesday  the  Swami  fasted,  following  the  orthodox  rule:  it  was  the 
eleventh  day  of  the  moon.  Sister  Nivedita  came  to  the  monastery  to  ask  him 
some  questions  about  her  school;  but  he  was  not  interested  and  referred  her  to 
some  other  Swamis.  He  insisted,  however,  on  serving  Nivedita  the  morning 
meal.  To  quote  the  Sister’s  words: 

Each  dish,  as  it  was  offered — boiled  seeds  of  the  jack-fruit,  boiled  potatoes,  plain  rice, 
and  ice-cold  milk — formed  the  subject  of  playful  chat;  and  finally,  to  end  the  meal,  he 
himself  poured  the  water  over  her  hands,  and  dried  them  with  a  towel. 

“It  is  I  who  should  do  these  things  for  you,  Swamiji!  Not  you  for  me!”  was  the  protest 
naturally  offered.  But  his  answer  was  startling  in  its  solemnity — “Jesus  washed  the  feet  of 
his  disciples!” 

Something  checked  the  answer,  “But  that  was  the  last  time!”  as  it  rose  to  the  lips,  and 
the  words  remained  unuttered.  This  was  well.  For  here  also,  the  last  time  had  come. 

There  was  nothing  sad  or  grave  about  the  Swami  during  these  days.  Efforts 
were  made  not  to  tire  him.  Conversations  were  kept  as  light  as  possible,  touch¬ 
ing  only  upon  the  pet  animals  that  surrounded  him,  his  garden  experiments, 
books,  and  absent  friends.  But  all  the  while  one  was  conscious  of  a  luminous 
presence  of  which  the  Swami’s  bodily  form  seemed  only  a  shadow  or  symbol. 
The  members  of  the  monastery  had  never  felt  so  strongly  as  now,  before  him, 
that  they  stood  in  the  presence  of  an  infinite  light;  yet  none  was  prepared  to 
see  the  end  so  soon,  least  of  all  on  that  Friday,  July  the  Fourth,  on  which  he 
appeared  so  much  stronger  and  healthier  than  he  had  been  for  years. 

On  the  supreme  day,  Friday,  he  rose  very  early.  Going  to  the  chapel,  alone, 
he  shut  the  windows  and  bolted  the  doors,  contrary  to  his  habit,  and  meditated 
for  three  hours.  Descending  the  stairs  of  the  shrine,  he  sang  a  beautiful  song 
about  Kali: 


Is  Kali,  my  Mother,  really  black? 

The  Naked  One,  though  black  She  seems, 

Lights  the  Lotus  of  the  heart. 

Men  call  Her  black,  but  yet  my  mind 
Does  not  believe  that  She  is  so: 

Now  She  is  white,  now  red,  now  blue; 

Now  She  appears  as  yellow,  too. 

I  hardly  know  who  Mother  is, 

Though  I  have  pondered  all  my  life: 

Now  Purusha,  now  Prakriti, 

And  now  the  Void,  She  seems  to  be. 

To  meditate  on  all  these  things 
Confounds  poor  Kamalakanta’s  wits. 

Then  he  said,  almost  in  a  whisper:  “If  there  were  another  Vivekananda,  then 
he  would  have  understood  what  this  Vivekananda  has  done!  And  yet — how 
many  Vivekanandas  shall  be  born  in  time!” 

He  expressed  the  desire  to  worship  Mother  Kali  at  the  Math  the  following 


Vivekananda 


178 

day,  and  asked  two  of  his  disciples  to  procure  all  the  necessary  articles  for  the 
ceremony.  Next  he  asked  the  disciple  Suddhananda  to  read  a  passage  from  the 
Yajur-Veda  with  the  commentary  of  a  well-known  expositor.  The  Swami  said 
that  he  did  not  agree  with  the  commentator  and  exhorted  the  disciple  to  give 
a  new  interpretation  of  the  Vedic  texts. 

He  partook  of  the  noon  meal  with  great  relish,  in  company  with  the  members 
of  the  Math,  though  usually,  at  that  time,  he  ate  alone  in  his  room  because  of 
his  illness.  Immediately  afterwards,  full  of  life  and  humour,  he  gave  lessons  to 
the  brahmacharins  for  three  hours  on  Sanskrit  grammar.  In  the  afternoon  he 
took  a  walk  for  about  two  miles  with  Swami  Premananda  and  discussed  his  plan 
to  start  a  Vedic  College  in  the  monastery. 

“What  will  be  the  good  of  studying  the  Vedas?”  Premananda  asked. 

“It  will  kill  superstition,”  Swami  Vivekananda  said. 

On  his  return  the  Swami  inquired  very  tenderly  concerning  every  member 
of  the  monastery.  Then  he  conversed  for  a  long  time  with  his  companions  on 
the  rise  and  fall  of  nations.  “India  is  immortal,”  he  said,  “if  she  persists  in  her 
search  for  God.  But  if  she  goes  in  for  politics  and  social  conflict,  she  will  die.” 

At  seven  o’clock  in  the  evening  the  bell  rang  for  worship  in  the  chapel.  The 
Swami  went  to  his  room  and  told  the  disciple  who  attended  him  that  none 
was  to  come  to  him  until  called  for.  He  spent  an  hour  in  meditation  and  telling 
his  beads,  then  called  the  disciple  and  asked  him  to  open  all  the  windows  and 
fan  his  head.  He  lay  down  quietly  on  his  bed  and  the  attendant  thought  that 
he  was  either  sleeping  or  meditating. 

At  the  end  of  an  hour  his  hands  trembled  a  little  and  he  breathed  once  very 
deeply.  There  was  a  silence  for  a  minute  or  two,  and  again  he  breathed  in  the 
same  manner.  His  eyes  became  fixed  in  the  centre  of  his  eyebrows,  his  face 
assumed  a  divine  expression,  and  eternal  silence  fell. 

“There  was,”  said  a  brother  disciple  of  the  Swami,  “a  little  blood  in  his 
nostrils,  about  his  mouth,  and  in  his  eyes.”  According  to  the  Yoga  scriptures, 
the  life-breath  of  an  illumined  yogi  passes  out  through  the  opening  on  the  top 
of  the  head,  causing  the  blood  to  flow  in  the  nostrils  and  the  mouth. 

The  great  ecstasy  took  place  at  ten  minutes  past  nine.  Swami  Vivekananda 
passed  away  at  the  age  of  thirty-nine  years,  five  months,  and  twenty-four  days, 
thus  fulfilling  his  own  prophecy:  “I  shall  not  live  to  be  forty  years  old.” 

The  brother  disciples  thought  that  he  might  have  fallen  into  samadhi,  and 
chanted  the  Master’s  name  to  bring  back  his  consciousness.  But  he  remained 
on  his  back  motionless. 

Physicians  were  sent  for  and  the  body  was  thoroughly  examined.  In  the  doc¬ 
tor’s  opinion  life  was  only  suspended;  artificial  respiration  was  tried.  At  mid¬ 
night,  however,  Swami  Vivekananda  was  pronounced  dead,  the  cause,  according 
to  medical  science,  having  been  apoplexy  or  sudden  failure  of  the  heart.  But  the 
monks  were  convinced  that  their  leader  had  voluntarily  cast  off  his  body  in 
samadhi,  as  predicted  by  Sri  Ramakrishna. 

In  the  morning  people  poured  in  from  all  quarters.  Nivedita  sat  by  the 
body  and  fanned  it  till  it  was  brought  down  at  2  p.m.  to  the  porch  leading  to 
the  courtyard.  It  was  covered  with  ochre  robes  and  decorated  with  flowers. 
Incense  was  burnt  and  a  religious  service  was  performed  with  lights,  conch- 


Vivekananda 


179 


shells,  and  bells.  The  brother  monks  and  disciples  took  their  final  leave  and 
the  procession  started,  moving  slowly  through  the  courtyard  and  across  the 
lawn,  till  it  reached  the  vilva  tree  near  the  spot  where  the  Swami  himself  had 
desired  his  body  to  be  cremated. 

The  funeral  pyre  was  built  and  the  body  was  consigned  to  the  flames  kindled 
with  sandalwood.  Across  the  Ganges,  on  the  other  bank,  Ramakrishna  had  been 
cremated  sixteen  years  before. 

Nivedita  began  to  weep  like  a  child,  rolling  on  the  ground.  Suddenly  the 
wind  blew  into  her  lap  a  piece  of  the  ochre  robe  from  the  pyre,  and  she 
received  it  as  a  blessing.  It  was  dusk  when  the  flames  subsided.  The  sacred  relics 
were  gathered  and  the  pyre  was  washed  with  the  water  of  the  Ganges.  The 
place  is  now  marked  by  a  temple,  the  table  of  the  altar  standing  on  the  very 
spot  where  the  Swami’s  body  rested  in  the  flames. 

Gloom  and  desolation  fell  upon  the  monastery.  The  monks  prayed  in  the 
depths  of  their  hearts:  “O  Lord!  Thy  will  be  done!”  But  deep  beneath  their 
grief  all  felt  that  this  was  not  the  end.  The  words  of  the  leader,  uttered  long 
before  his  death,  rang  in  their  ears: 

“It  may  be  that  I  shall  find  it  good  to  get  outside  my  body — to  cast  it  off 
like  a  worn-out  garment.  But  I  shall  not  cease  to  work.  I  shall  inspire  men 
everywhere,  until  the  world  shall  know  that  it  is  one  with  God.” 

And:  “May  I  be  born  again  and  again,  and  suffer  thousands  of  miseries,  so 
that  I  may  worship  the  only  God  that  exists,  the  only  God  I  believe  in,  the  sum 
total  of  all  souls.” 

For  centuries  to  come  people  everywhere  will  be  inspired  by  Swami  Vive- 
kananda’s  message:  O  Man!  first  realize  that  you  are  one  with  Brahman — aham 
Brahmasmi — and  then  realize  that  the  whole  universe  is  verily  the  same 
Brahman — sarvam  khalvidam  Brahma. 


-v'  ^  ilfiil  ••••..  Ml  ■  , 


.  -. . 


■ 


VlVEKANANDA,  THE  WANDERING  MONK 


VlVEKANANDA  TEMPLE  AT  THE  BeLUR  MATH 


The  Belur  Math 


APPENDIX 


APPENDIX1 


RELIGION 

Each  soul  is  potentially  divine.  The  goal  is  to  manifest  this  divinity  within  by 
controlling  nature,  external  and  internal.  Do  this  either  by  work,  or  worship, 
or  psychic  control,  or  philosophy — by  one,  or  more,  or  all  of  these — and  be  free. 
This  is  the  whole  of  religion.  Doctrines,  or  dogmas,  or  rituals,  or  books,  or 
temples,  or  forms,  are  but  secondary  details. 

Religion  is  its  own  end.  That  religion  which  is  only  a  means  to  worldly  well¬ 
being  is  not  religion,  whatever  else  it  may  be. 

True  religion  is  entirely  transcendental.  Every  being  that  is  in  the  universe 
has  the  potentiality  of  transcending  the  senses;  even  the  little  worm  will  one 
day  transcend  the  senses  and  reach  God.  No  life  will  be  a  failure;  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  failure  in  the  universe. 

He  alone  can  be  religious  who  dares  to  say,  as  the  mighty  Buddha  once  said 
under  the  Bo-tree:  “Death  is  better  than  a  vegetating,  ignorant  life;  it  is  better 
to  die  on  the  battlefield  than  to  live  a  life  of  defeat/'  This  is  the  basis  of  religion. 
When  a  man  takes  this  stand,  he  is  on  the  way  to  finding  the  truth,  he  is  on 
the  way  to  God.  That  determination  is  the  first  impulse  towards  becoming 
religious. 

Man  must  realize  God,  feel  God,  see  God,  talk  to  God.  That  is  religion.  All 
the  ancient  books  and  scriptures  are  the  writings  of  persons  who  came  into 
direct  contact  with  spiritual  facts.  They  say  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  realiza¬ 
tion  even  in  this  life,  and  that  it  is  open  to  everyone;  and  religion  begins  with 
the  opening  of  this  faculty,  if  I  may  call  it  so. 

That  is  religion  which  makes  us  realize  the  Unchangeable  One;  and  that  is 
the  religion  for  everyone.  He  who  realizes  transcendental  truths,  he  who  realizes 
the  Atman  in  his  own  nature,  he  who  comes  face  to  face  with  God,  sees  God 
in  everything,  has  become  a  rishi.  And  there  is  no  religious  life  for  you  until  you 

1  This  appendix  contains  a  number  of  Swami  Vivekananda’s  important  statements  on 
religion  and  philosophy.  They  have  been  selected  from  two  volumes:  Swami  Vivekananda 
on  Religion  and  Philosophy,  published  by  the  Ramakrishna  Mission  Students'  Home, 
Calcutta,  and  Teachings  of  Swami  Vivekananda,  published  by  the  Advaita  Asrama, 
Mayavati,  Himalayas.  We  wish  to  express  our  indebtedness  to  the  publishers, 

181 


182  Vivekananda 

have  become  a  rishi.  Then  alone  does  religion  begin  for  you;  now  is  only  the 
preparation. 

No  man  is  bom  into  any  religion;  he  has  religion  in  his  own  soul. 

Now,  in  my  little  experience  I  have  collected  this  knowledge:  In  spite  of 
all  the  devilry  that  religion  is  blamed  with,  religion  is  not  at  all  at  fault;  no 
religion  ever  persecuted  men,  no  religion  ever  burnt  witches,  no  religion  ever 
did  any  of  these  things.  What  then  incited  people  to  do  these  things?  Politics, 
but  never  religion.  And  if  such  politics  takes  the  name  of  religion,  whose  fault 
is  it? 

To  the  Hindu,  man  is  not  travelling  from  error  to  truth,  but  from  truth  to 
truth — from  lower  truth  to  higher  truth.  To  him  all  religions,  from  the  lowest 
fetishism  to  the  highest  absolutism,  mean  so  many  attempts  of  the  human  soul 
to  grasp  and  realize  the  Infinite,  each  determined  by  the  conditions  of  its  birth 
and  association;  and  each  of  these  attempts  marks  a  stage  of  progress. 

Religious  quarrels  are  always  over  the  husks.  When  purity,  when  spirituality, 
goes,  leaving  the  soul  dry,  then  quarrels  begin,  and  not  before. 

Man  has  an  idea  that  there  can  be  only  one  religion,  that  there  can  be  only 
one  Prophet,  that  there  can  be  only  one  Incarnation;  but  that  idea  is  not  true. 
By  studying  the  lives  of  all  these  great  Messengers,  we  find  that  each  was  des¬ 
tined  to  play  a  part,  as  it  were,  and  a  part  only;  that  the  harmony  consists  in 
the  sum  total,  and  not  in  one  note. 

There  never  was  my  religion  or  yours,  my  national  religion  or  your  national 
religion.  There  never  existed  many  religions;  there  is  only  one  Religion.  One 
infinite  Religion  has  existed  all  through  eternity  and  will  ever  exist,  and  this 
Religion  is  expressing  itself  in  various  countries  in  different  ways. 

There  is  one  principle  which  underlies  all  the  various  manifestations  of 
religion  and  which  has  already  been  mapped  out  for  us.  Every  science  must  end 
where  it  finds  a  unity,  because  we  cannot  go  any  farther.  When  a  perfect  unity 
is  reached,  then  science  has  nothing  more  of  principles  to  tell  us.  So  with 
religion.  The  gigantic  principle,  the  scope,  the  plan,  of  religion  was  already 
discovered  ages  ago,  when  man  found  the  last  words,  as  they  are  called  in  the 
Vedas,  “I  am  He” — that  there  is  One  in  whom  this  whole  universe  of  matter 
and  mind  finds  its  unity,  whom  they  call  God,  or  Brahman,  or  Allah,  or  Jehovah, 
or  by  any  other  name.  We  cannot  go  beyond  that. 

The  end  of  all  religions  is  the  realizing  of  God  in  the  soul.  If  there  is  one 
universal  truth  in  all  religions,  I  place  it  here,  in  realizing  God.  Ideals  and 
methods  may  differ,  but  that  is  the  central  point.  There  may  be  a  thousand 
different  radii,  but  they  all  converge  upon  the  one  centre,  and  that  is  the  real¬ 
ization  of  God— something  behind  this  world  of  the  senses,  this  world  of 


Appendix  183 

eternal  eating  and  drinking  and  talking  nonsense,  this  world  of  false  shadows 
and  selfishness. 

I  accept  all  the  religions  that  were  in  the  past,  and  worship  them  ail;  I  worship 
God  with  every  one  of  them,  in  whatever  form  they  worship  Him.  I  shall  go  to 
the  mosque  of  the  Mohammedan;  I  shall  enter  the  Christian  church  and  kneel 
before  the  Crucifix;  I  shall  enter  the  Buddhist  temple,  where  I  shall  take  refuge 
in  Buddha  and  his  Law.  I  shall  go  into  the  forest  and  sit  down  in  meditation 
with  the  Hindu,  who  is  trying  to  see  the  Light  which  enlightens  the  hearts  of 
everyone.  Not  only  shall  I  do  these  things,  but  I  shall  keep  my  heart  open  for 
all  that  may  come  in  the  future. 

If  there  is  ever  to  be  a  Universal  Religion,  it  must  be  one  which  will  have  no 
location  in  place  or  time;  which  will  be  infinite  as  the  God  it  will  preach,  and 
whose  sun  will  shine  upon  the  followers  of  Krishna  and  Christ,  on  saints  and 
sinners,  alike;  which  will  not  be  Brahmanical  or  Buddhist,  Christian  or  Moham¬ 
medan,  but  the  sum  total  of  all  these,  and  still  have  infinite  space  for  develop¬ 
ment;  which  in  its  catholicity  will  embrace  in  its  infinite  arms,  and  find  a  place 
for,  every  human  being,  from  the  lowest,  grovelling  savage,  not  far  removed 
from  the  brute,  to  the  highest  man,  towering  by  the  virtues  of  his  head  and 
heart  almost  above  humanity,  making  society  stand  in  awe  of  him  and  doubt 
his  human  nature.  It  will  be  a  religion  which  will  have  no  place  for  persecution 
or  intolerance  in  its  polity,  which  will  recognize  divinity  in  every  man  and 
woman,  and  whose  whole  scope,  whose  whole  force,  will  be  centred  in  aiding 
humanity  to  realize  its  own  true,  divine  nature. 


GOD 

The  sum  total  of  this  whole  universe  is  God  Himself.  Is  God  then  matter? 
No,  certainly  not;  for  matter  is  God  perceived  by  the  five  senses.  God  perceived 
through  the  inner  organ  is  mind;  and  seen  through  the  Spirit,  He  is  Spirit.  He 
is  not  matter,  but  whatever  is  real  in  matter  is  He. 

The  Universal  Intelligence  is  what  we  call  God.  Call  It  by  any  other  name, 
it  is  absolutely  certain  that  in  the  beginning  there  was  that  infinite  Cosmic 
Intelligence. 

The  highest  ideal  of  every  man  is  called  God.  Ignorant  or  wise,  saint  or 
sinner,  man  or  woman,  educated  or  uneducated,  cultivated  or  uncultivated — to 
every  human  being  the  highest  ideals  of  beauty,  of  sublimity,  and  of  power  give 
us  the  complete  conception  of  the  loving  and  lovable  God.  These  ideals  exist, 
in  some  shape  or  other,  in  every  mind  naturally;  they  form  part  and  parcel  of 
all  our  minds.  All  the  active  manifestations  of  human  nature  are  the  struggles 
of  these  ideals  to  become  realized  in  practical  life. 

The  child  rebels  against  law  as  soon  as  it  is  born.  Its  first  utterance  is  a  cry, 
a  protest  against  the  bondage  in  which  it  finds  itself.  This  longing  for  freedom 


Vivekananda 


184 

produces  the  idea  of  a  Being  who  is  absolutely  free.  The  concept  of  God  is  a 
fundamental  element  in  the  human  constitution.  Satchidananda  (Existence- 
Knowledge-Bliss  Absolute)  is,  in  Vedanta,  the  highest  concept  of  God  possible 
to  the  mind.  It  is  by  Its  nature  the  Essence  of  Knowledge  and  the  Essence  of 
Bliss. 

The  religions  of  the  unthinking  masses  all  over  the  world  teach,  and  have 
always  taught,  of  a  God  who  is  outside  the  universe,  who  lives  in  heaven,  who 
governs  from  that  place,  who  is  the  punisher  of  the  bad  and  the  rewarder  of 
the  good,  and  so  on.  As  man  advances  spiritually,  he  begins  to  feel  that  that? 
God  is  omnipresent,  that  He  is  not  a  distant  God,  but  clearly  the  Soul  of  all 
souls.  And  a  few  individuals,  who  have  developed  enough  and  are  pure  enough, 
go  still  farther  and  find  at  last  that  they  and  the  Father  are  one. 

No  man  can  really  see  God  except  through  human  manifestations.  Whenever 
we  try  to  think  of  God  as  He  is,  in  His  absolute  perfection,  we  invariably  meet 
with  the  most  miserable  failure,  because  as  long  as  we  are  men,  we  cannot 
conceive  Him  as  anything  higher  than  man.  The  time  will  come  when  we  shall 
transcend  our  human  nature  and  know  Him  as  He  is. 

There  are  two  ideas  of  God  in  our  scriptures:  the  one,  the  Personal,  and  the 
other,  the  Impersonal.  The  idea  of  the  Personal  God  is  that  He  is  the  omni¬ 
present  Creator,  Preserver,  and  Destroyer  of  everything,  the  eternal  Father  and 
Mother  of  the  universe,  but  One  who  is  eternally  separate  from  us  and  from 
all  souls.  Liberation  consists  in  coming  near  to  Him  and  living  in  Him.  Then 
there  is  the  other  idea,  that  of  the  Impersonal,  where  all  these  adjectives  are  taken 
away  as  superfluous,  as  illogical,  and  there  remains  an  impersonal,  omnipresent 
Being.  He  cannot  be  called  a  knowing  being,  because  knowledge  belongs  only 
to  the  human  mind.  He  cannot  be  called  a  thinking  being,  because  thinking  is 
a  process  of  the  weak  only.  He  cannot  be  called  a  reasoning  being,  because 
reasoning  too  is  a  sign  of  weakness.  He  cannot  be  called  a  creating  being, 
because  none  creates  except  in  bondage.  What  bondage  has  He?  None  works 
except  it  be  to  supply  some  wants;  what  wants  has  He?  In  the  Vedas  it  is  not 
the  word  He  that  is  used,  but  It,  for  He  would  make  an  invidious  distinction, 
as  if  God  were  a  man. 

A  generalization  ending  in  the  Personal  God  can  never  be  universal,  for  to 
conceive  of  a  Personal  God  we  must  say  that  He  is  all  merciful,  all  good.  But 
this  world  is  a  mixed  thing — some  good,  some  bad.  And  you  will  always  find 
that  the  idea  of  a  Personal  God  has  to  carry  with  it  the  idea  of  a  Personal  Devil. 
That  is  how  we  clearly  see  that  the  idea  of  a  Personal  God  is  not  a  true  gen¬ 
eralization.  We  have  to  go  beyond,  to  the  Impersonal.  In  That  the  universe 
exists  with  all  its  joys  and  miseries;  for  whatever  exists  in  it  has  all  come  from 
the  Impersonal. 

Brahman  is  One,  but  is  at  the  same  time  appearing  to  us  as  many  on  the 
relative  plane.  Name  and  form  are  at  the  root  of  this  relativity.  For  instance, 


185 


Appendix 

what  do  you  find  when  you  abstract  name  and  form  from  a  jar?  Only  earth, 
which  is  its  essence.  Similarly,  through  delusion  you  are  thinking  of  and  seeing 
a  cloth,  a  monastery,  and  so  on.  The  phenomenal  world  depends  on  this 
nescience,  which  obstructs  knowledge  and  has  no  real  existence.  One  sees 
variety — such  as  wife,  children,  body,  mind — only  in  the  world  created  by 
nescience,  by  means  of  name  and  form.  As  soon  as  this  nescience  is  removed, 
there  takes  place  the  realization  of  Brahman,  which  eternally  exists. 

You  are  also  that  undivided  Brahman.  This  very  moment  you  can  realize  It, 
if  you  think  yourself  truly  and  absolutely  to  be  so.  It  is  all  mere  want  of  direct 
perception.  .  .  .  Being  again  and  again  entangled  in  the  intricate  maze  of 
delusion  and  hard  hit  by  sorrows  and  afflictions,  the  eye  will  turn  of  itself  to 
one’s  own  real  nature,  the  Inner  Self.  It  is  owing  to  the  presence  of  the  desire 
for  bliss,  in  the  heart,  that  man,  getting  hard  shocks  one  after  another,  turns 
his  eye  inward — to  his  own  Self.  A  time  is  sure  to  come  to  everyone,  without 
exception,  when  he  will  do  so;  to  one  it  may  be  in  this  life,  to  another,  after 
thousands  of  incarnations. 

Suppose  we  all  go  with  vessels  in  our  hands  to  fetch  water  from  a  lake.  One 
has  a  cup,  another  a  jar,  another  a  bucket,  and  so  forth,  and  we  all  fill  our 
vessels.  The  water  in  each  case  naturally  takes  the  form  of  the  vessel  carried 
by  each  of  us.  So  it  is  with  religion.  Our  minds  are  like  those  vessels.  God  is  like 
the  water  filling  the  different  vessels.  And  in  each  vessel  the  vision  of  God  comes 
in  the  form  of  the  vessel.  Yet  He  is  One;  He  is  God  in  every  case. 

The  Personal  God  is  as  much  an  entity  for  Himself  as  we  are  for  ourselves, 
and  no  more.  God  can  also  be  seen  as  a  form,  just  as  we  are  seen.  As  men  we 
must  have  God;  as  God  we  need  none.  This  is  why  Sri  Ramakrishna  saw  the 
Divine  Mother  ever  present  with  him,  more  real  than  any  other  thing  around 
him;  but  in  samadhi  all  disappeared  but  the  Self.  The  Personal  God  comes 
nearer  and  nearer,  until  He  melts  away  and  there  is  no  more  Personal  God  and 
no  more  “1” — all  is  merged  in  the  Self. 

After  so  much  austerity  I  have  understood  this  as  the  real  truth:  God  is 
present  in  every  jiva;  there  is  no  other  God  besides  that.  He  who  serves  the  jiva 
serves  God  indeed. 

He  reveals  Himself  to  the  pure  heart;  the  pure  and  the  stainless  see  God,  yea, 
even  in  this  life.  Then  all  doubt  ceases.  So  the  best  proof  a  Hindu  sage  gives 
about  God  is:  “I  have  seen  God.” 

I  have  been  asked  many  times,  “Why  do  you  use  that  word  God?”  Because 
it  is  the  best  word  for  our  purpose.  You  cannot  find  a  better  word  than  that; 
all  the  hopes,  aspirations,  and  happiness  of  humanity  have  been  centred  in 
that  word.  It  is  impossible  now  to  change  that  word.  A  word  like  this  is  first 
coined  by  a  great  saint,  who  realizes  its  import  and  understands  its  meaning. 
But  as  it  becomes  current  in  society,  ignorant  people  take  up  the  word,  and 


Vivekananda 


186 

the  result  is  that  it  loses  its  spirit  and  glory.  The  word  God  has  been  used  from 
time  immemorial,  and  the  idea  of  the  Cosmic  Intelligence,  and  all  that  is  great 
and  holy,  is  associated  with  it. 

Today  God  is  being  abandoned  by  the  world  because  He  does  not  seem  to  be 
doing  enough  for  the  world.  So  they  say,  “Of  what  good  is  He?”  Shall  we  look 
upon  God  as  a  mere  municipal  authority? 

He  neither  punishes  nor  rewards  any.  His  infinite  mercy  is  open  to  everyone, 
at  all  times,  in  all  places,  under  all  conditions — unfailing,  unswerving. 

The  wind  is  blowing;  those  vessels  whose  sails  are  unfurled  catch  it  and  go 
forward  on  their  way,  but  those  which  have  their  sails  furled  do  not  catch  the 
wind.  Is  that  the  fault  of  the  wind?  Is  it  the  fault  of  the  Merciful  Father,  whose 
wind  of  mercy  is  blowing  without  ceasing,  day  and  night,  whose  mercy  knows 
no  end — is  it  His  fault  that  some  of  us  are  happy  and  some  unhappy? 

Be  strong  and  stand  up  and  seek  the  God  of  Love.  This  is  the  highest 
strength.  What  power  is  higher  than  the  power  of  purity?  Love  and  purity 
govern  the  world.  This  love  of  God  cannot  be  reached  by  the  weak;  therefore 
be  not  weak,  either  physically,  mentally,  morally,  or  spiritually. 

The  Lord  alone  is  real;  everything  else  is  unreal.  Everything  else  should  be 
rejected  for  the  sake  of  the  Lord.  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity!  Serve  the  Lord 
and  Him  alone. 

God  is  the  inexplicable,  inexpressible  essence  of  love — to  be  known,  but 
never  defined. 


DIVINE  INCARNATION 

God  understands  human  failings  and  becomes  man  to  do  good  to  humanity. 
“Whenever  virtue  subsides  and  wickedness  prevails  I  manifest  Myself.  To  estab¬ 
lish  virtue,  to  destroy  evil,  to  save  the  good,  I  come  in  every  age.”  “Fools  deride 
Me  who  have  assumed  the  human  form,  without  knowing  My  real  nature  as 
the  Lord  of  the  universe.”  Such  are  Sri  Krishna's  declarations  in  the  Gita  on 
Incarnation.  “When  a  huge  tidal  wave  comes,”  says  Sri  Ramakrishna,  “all  the 
little  brooks  and  ditches  become  full  to  the  brim  without  any  effort  or  con¬ 
sciousness  on  their  own  part;  so  when  an  Incarnation  comes,  a  tidal  wave  of 
spirituality  breaks  upon  the  world,  and  people  feel  spirituality  in  the  very  air.” 

It  has  been  said:  “No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,  but  through  the  Son.” 
And  that  is  true.  Where  shall  we  see  God  but  in  the  Son?  It  is  true  that  you 
and  I,  and  the  poorest  of  us,  the  meanest,  even,  embody  that  God,  even  reflect 
that  God.  The  vibration  of  light  is  everywhere,  omnipresent.  But  we  have  to 
light  the  lamp  before  we  can  see  the  light.  The  omnipresent  God  of  the  universe 


Appendix  1 87 

cannot  be  seen  until  He  is  reflected  in  these  giant  lamps  of  the  earth — the 
Prophets,  the  God-men,  the  Incarnations. 

“Whenever  extraordinary  spiritual  power  is  manifested  by  man,  know  that  I 
am  there;  it  is  from  Me  that  the  manifestation  comes."  That  leaves  the  door 
open  for  the  Hindu  to  worship  the  Incarnations  of  all  the  religions  in  the  world. 
The  Hindu  can  worship  any  sage  and  any  saint  from  any  country  whatsoever. 

It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  worship  God  as  man,  and  blessed  are  those  races 
which  have  such  God-men  to  worship.  Christians  have  such  a  God-man  in 
Christ.  That  is  the  natural  way  to  see  God;  see  God  in  man.  All  our  ideas  of 
God  are  concentrated  there. 

The  Absolute  cannot  be  worshipped;  so  we  must  worship  a  manifestation, 
such  a  one  as  has  our  nature.  Jesus  had  our  nature;  he  became  the  Christ.  So 
can  we  and  so  must  we.  Christ  and  Buddha  are  the  names  of  a  state  to  be 
attained;  Jesus  and  Gautama  were  the  persons  to  attain  it. 

Our  salutations  go  to  all  the  past  Prophets,  whose  teachings  and  lives  we 
have  inherited,  whatever  may  have  been  their  race,  clime,  or  creed.  Our  salu¬ 
tations  go  to  all  those  God-like  men  and  women  who  are  working  at  present  to 
help  humanity,  whatever  be  their  birth,  colour,  or  race.  Our  salutations  go 
to  those  who  are  coming  in  the  future — living  Gods — to  work  unselfishly  for 
our  descendants! 


THE  ATMAN,  OR  SOUL 

What  is  it  that  gives  unity  to  the  changing  elements  of  our  being?  What  is  it 
that  keeps  up  the  identity  of  the  thing  called  individuality,  moving  from  mo¬ 
ment  to  moment?  What  is  it  by  which  all  our  different  impressions  are  pieced 
together,  upon  which  the  perceptions  come  together,  as  it  were,  reside,  and 
form  a  united  whole?  This  something  upon  which  the  mind  is  painting  all  these 
pictures,  this  something  upon  which  our  sensations,  carried  by  the  mind,  are 
placed  and  grouped  and  formed  into  a  unity,  is  what  is  called  the  Soul  of  man. 

The  mind  and  the  body  are  like  two  layers  in  the  same  substance,  moving  at 
different  rates  of  speed.  One  being  slower  and  the  other  quicker — relatively 
speaking — we  can  distinguish  between  the  two  motions.  But  still  something 
else  is  necessary.  Motion  can  only  be  perceived  when  there  is  something  else 
which  is  not  moving.  Behind  this  never-ending  chain  of  motion  is  the  Soul, 
changeless,  colourless,  pure.  All  these  impressions  are  merely  reflected  upon  It, 
as  images  are  thrown  upon  a  screen  by  a  magic  lantern  without  in  any  way 
tarnishing  it. 

The  feeling  of  freedom  which  possesses  us  all  shows  there  is  something  in  us 
besides  mind  and  body.  The  Soul  that  reigns  within  is  free  and  creates  the 
desire  for  freedom. 


188 


Vivekananda 


The  Hindu  believes  that  man  is  Spirit.  Him  the  sword  cannot  pierce,  Him 
fire  cannot  burn,  Him  water  cannot  melt,  Him  the  air  cannot  dry.  The  Hindu 
believes  that  every  soul  is  a  circle  whose  circumference  is  nowhere,  but  whose 
centre  is  located  in  the  body,  and  that  death  means  the  change  of  this  centre 
from  body  to  body.  The  soul  is  not  bound  by  the  conditions  of  matter.  In  its 
very  essence  it  is  free,  unlimited,  holy,  pure,  and  perfect.  But  somehow  or  other 
it  finds  itself  tied  down  to  matter  and  thinks  of  itself  as  matter. 

We  all  hold  in  India  that  the  Soul  is  by  Its  nature  pure  and  perfect,  infinite 
in  power,  and  blessed.  According  to  the  dualist,  this  natural  blissfulness  of 
the  Soul  has  become  contracted  by  past  bad  work,  and  through  the  grace  of 
God  It  is  again  going  to  open  out  and  show  Its  perfection;  while  according  to 
the  non-dualist,  even  this  idea  of  contraction  is  a  partial  mistake;  it  is  the  veil 
of  maya  that  causes  us  to  think  the  Soul  has  lost  Its  powers;  but  the  powers  are 
there,  fully  present. 

In  every  man  and  in  every  animal,  however  weak  or  wicked,  great  or  small, 
resides  the  same  omnipresent,  omniscient  Soul.  The  difference  is  not  in  the 
Soul,  but  in  the  degree  of  manifestation. 

Everything  in  time,  space,  and  causation  is  bound.  The  Soul  is  beyond  all 
time,  all  space,  all  causation.  That  which  is  bound  is  nature,  not  the  Soul. 
Therefore  proclaim  your  freedom  and  be  what  you  are — ever  free,  ever  blessed. 

You  are  free,  free,  free!  “Oh,  blessed  am  I!  Free  am  I!  I  am  infinite! 
In  my  soul  I  can  find  no  beginning  and  no  end.  All  is  my  Self/’  Say  this 
unceasingly. 

Vedanta  teaches  that  Nirvana  can  be  attained  here  and  now,  that  we  do  not 
have  to  wait  for  death  to  reach  it.  Nirvana  is  the  realization  of  the  Self;  and 
after  having  once  known  that,  if  only  for  an  instant,  never  again  can  one  be 
deluded  by  the  mirage  of  personality. 

There  is  no  “I”  and  no  “you”;  it  is  all  one.  It  is  either  all  “I”  or  all  “you.” 
This  idea  of  duality,  of  two,  is  entirely  false,  and  the  whole  universe,  as  we 
ordinarily  know  it,  is  the  result  of  this  false  knowledge.  When  discrimination 
comes,  and  man  finds  there  are  not  two,  but  One,  he  finds  that  he  himself  is 
this  universe. 

The  seeing  of  many  is  the  great  sin  of  the  world.  See  all  as  the  Self  and 
love  all;  let  the  idea  of  separateness  go. 

Man,  after  his  vain  search  for  God  outside  himself,  completes  the  circle  and 
comes  back  to  the  point  from  which  he  started — the  human  soul;  and  he  finds 
that  the  God  whom  he  was  searching  for  over  hill  and  dale,  whom  he  was  seek- 


189 


Appendix 

ing  in  every  brook,  in  every  temple,  in  churches  and  heavens,  that  God  whom 
he  was  imagining  as  sitting  in  heaven  and  ruling  the  world,  is  his  own  Self. 
I  am  He,  and  He  is  I.  None  is  God  but  I,  and  this  little  “I”  never  existed. 


Cry  for  help  and  you  will  get  it;  and  at  last  you  will  find  that  the  one  crying 
for  help  has  vanished  and  so  has  the  Helper,  and  the  play  is  over.  Only  the  Self 
remains. 


THE  GURU 

The  soul  can  only  receive  impulses  from  another  soul,  and  from  nothing  else. 
We  may  study  books  all  our  lives,  we  may  become  very  intellectual;  but  in  the 
end  we  shall  find  that  we  have  not  developed  at  all  spiritually.  .  .  .  This  inade¬ 
quacy  of  books  to  quicken  spiritual  growth  is  the  reason  why,  although  almost 
every  one  of  us  can  speak  most  wonderfully  on  spiritual  matters,  when  it  comes 
to  action  and  the  living  of  a  spiritual  life,  we  find  ourselves  awfully  deficient. 
To  quicken  the  spirit,  the  impulse  must  come  from  another  soul.  The  person 
from  whose  soul  such  an  impulse  comes  is  called  the  guru,  the  teacher;  and  the 
person  to  whose  soul  the  impulse  is  conveyed  is  called  the  sishya,  the  student. 


He  is  the  guru  “who  has  himself  crossed  the  terrible  ocean  of  life,  and  with¬ 
out  any  thought  of  gain  to  himself  helps  others  also  to  cross  the  ocean/'  This  is 
the  guru,  and  mark  that  none  else  can  be  a  guru. 

It  is  a  mysterious  law  of  nature  that  as  soon  as  the  field  is  ready,  the  seed 
must  come;  as  soon  as  the  soul  wants  religion,  the  transmitter  of  religious  force 
must  come.  “The  seeking  sinner  meeteth  the  seeking  Saviour." 

There  are  great  dangers  in  regard  to  the  transmitter,  the  guru.  There  are 
many  who,  though  immersed  in  ignorance,  yet,  in  the  pride  of  their  hearts, 
fancy  they  know  everything,  and  not  only  do  not  stop  there,  but  offer  to  take 
others  on  their  shoulders;  and  thus,  the  blind  leading  the  blind,  both  fall  into 
the  ditch.  The  world  is  full  of  these.  Everyone  wants  to  be  a  teacher,  every 
beggar  wants  to  make  a  gift  of  a  million  dollars!  Just  as  these  beggars  are  ridic¬ 
ulous,  so  are  these  teachers. 

Get  the  mercy  of  God  and  of  His  greatest  children.  These  are  the  two  chief 
ways  to  God.  The  company  of  these  children  of  light  is  very  hard  to  get;  five 
minutes  in  their  company  will  change  a  whole  life,  and  if  you  really  want  it 
enough,  one  will  come  to  you.  The  presence  of  those  who  love  God  makes  a 
place  holy,  such  is  the  glory  of  the  children  of  the  Lord.  They  are  He;  and  when 
they  speak,  their  words  are  scriptures.  The  places  where  they  live  are  filled  with 
their  vibrations,  and  those  going  there  feel  them  and  tend  to  become  holy  also. 


190 


Vivekananda 


FAITH  IN  ONESELF 

Throughout  the  history  of  mankind,  if  any  one  motive  power  has  been  more 
potent  than  others  in  the  lives  of  great  men  and  women,  it  is  that  of  faith  in 
themselves.  Born  with  the  consciousness  that  they  were  to  be  great,  they  became 
great. 

Let  a  man  go  down  as  low  as  possible,  there  must  come  a  time  when  out  of 
sheer  desperation  he  will  take  an  upward  curve  and  learn  to  have  faith  in  him¬ 
self.  But  it  is  better  for  us  that  we  should  know  it  from  the  very  first.  Why 
should  we  have  all  these  bitter  experiences  in  order  to  gain  faith  in  ourselves? 

It  is  generally  said  that  he  is  an  atheist  who  does  not  believe  in  God.  Vedanta 
says  that  he  is  an  atheist  who  does  not  believe  in  himself.  But  this  is  not  selfish 
faith,  because  Vedanta,  again,  is  the  doctrine  of  Oneness.  It  means  faith  in  all 
because  you  are  all. 

Do  you  know  how  much  energy,  how  many  powers,  how  many  forces,  are 
still  lurking  behind  that  frame  of  yours?  What  scientist  has  known  all  that  is 
in  man?  Millions  of  years  have  passed  since  man  came  here,  and  yet  but  one 
infinitesimal  part  of  his  powers  has  been  manifested.  Therefore  you  must  not 
say  that  you  are  weak.  How  do  you  know  what  possibilities  lie  behind  that 
degradation  on  the  surface?  You  know  but  little  of  that  which  is  within  you; 
for  behind  you  is  the  ocean  of  infinite  power  and  blessedness. 

Be  not  afraid  of  anything.  You  will  do  marvellous  work.  The  moment  you 
fear,  you  are  nobody.  It  is  fear  that  is  the  great  cause  of  misery  in  the  world. 
It  is  fear  that  is  the  greatest  of  superstitions.  It  is  fear  that  is  the  cause  of  our 
woes.  And  it  is  fearlessness  that  brings  heaven  in  a  moment. 

If  a  man,  day  and  night,  thinks  he  is  miserable,  low,  and  nothing,  nothing 
he  becomes.  If  you  say,  “Yea,  yea,  I  am,  I  am,”  so  shall  you  be;  and  if  you  say, 
“I  am  not,”  think  that  you  are  not,  and  day  and  night  meditate  upon  the  fact 
that  you  are  nothing,  ay,  nothing  shall  you  be.  That  is  the  great  fact  which 
you  ought  to  remember.  We  are  the  children  of  the  Almighty;  we  are  sparks 
of  the  infinite  Divine  Fire.  How  can  you  be  nothing?  We  are  everything,  we 
can  do  everything — and  man  must  do  everything. 

Losing  faith  in  oneself  means  losing  faith  in  God.  Do  you  believe  in  that 
infinite,  good  Providence  working  in  and  through  you?  If  you  believe  that  this 
Omnipresent  One  is  present  in  every  atom,  is  in  everything,  through  and 
through,  penetrating  your  body,  mind,  and  soul,  how  can  you  lose  heart? 

Men  are  taught  from  childhood  that  they  are  weak  and  that  they  are  sinners. 
Teach  them  that  they  are  all  glorious  children  of  immortality,  even  those  who 
are  the  weakest  in  manifestation.  Let  positive,  strong,  helpful  thoughts  enter 


Appendix  191 

into  their  brains  from  their  very  childhood.  Lay  yourself  open  to  these  thoughts, 
and  not  to  weakening  and  paralysing  ones.  Say  to  your  own  minds,  “I  am  He, 
I  am  He.”  Let  it  ring  day  and  night  in  your  minds  like  a  song,  and  at  the  point 
of  death  declare,  “I  am  He.”  That  is  the  truth.  The  infinite  strength  of  the 
world  is  yours. 

Those  that  blame  others — and  alas!  the  number  of  them  is  increasing  every 
day — are  generally  miserable,  with  helpless  brains.  They  have  brought  them¬ 
selves  to  that  pass  through  their  own  mistakes,  and  blame  others;  but  this  does 
not  alter  their  position.  It  does  not  serve  them  in  any  way.  This  attempt  to 
throw  the  blame  upon  others  only  weakens  them  the  more.  Therefore  blame 
none  for  your  faults;  stand  upon  your  own  feet  and  take  the  whole  respon¬ 
sibility  upon  yourselves.  Say,  “This  misery  that  I  am  suffering  is  of  my  own 
doing,  and  that  very  thing  proves  that  it  will  have  to  be  undone  by  me  alone.” 
That  which  I  have  created  I  can  demolish;  that  which  is  created  by  someone 
else  I  shall  never  be  able  to  destroy.  Therefore  stand  up,  be  bold,  be  strong! 

All  the  strength  and  succour  you  want  is  within  yourselves.  Therefore  make 
your  own  future.  Let  the  dead  past  bury  its  dead.  The  infinite  future  is  before 
you,  and  you  must  always  remember  that  each  word,  thought,  and  deed  lays  up 
a  store  for  you,  and  that  as  the  bad  thoughts  and  bad  deeds  are  ready  to  spring 
upon  you  like  tigers,  so  also  there  is  the  inspiring  hope  that  the  good  thoughts 
and  good  deeds  are  ready,  with  the  power  of  a  hundred  thousand  angels,  to 
defend  you  always  and  for  ever. 

What  makes  a  man  stand  up  and  work?  Strength.  Strength  is  goodness, 
weakness  is  sin.  If  there  is  one  word  that  you  find  coming  out  like  a  bomb  from 
the  Upanishads,  bursting  like  a  bomb-shell  upon  masses  of  ignorance,  it  is  the 
word  fearlessness.  And  the  only  religion  that  ought  to  be  taught  is  the  religion 
of  fearlessness.  Either  in  this  world  or  in  the  world  of  religion,  it  is  true  that  fear 
is  the  sure  cause  of  degradation  and  sin.  It  is  fear  that  brings  misery,  fear  that 
brings  death,  fear  that  breeds  evil.  And  what  causes  fear?  Ignorance  of  our  own 
nature. 


KARMA-YOGA 

What  is  karma-yoga?  It  is  the  knowledge  of  the  secret  of  work.  Instead  of 
being  knocked  about  in  this  universe  and  after  long  delay  and  thrashing  getting 
to  know  things  as  they  are,  we  learn  from  karma-yoga  the  secret  of  work,  the 
method  of  work,  the  organizing  power  of  work.  A  vast  mass  of  energy  may  be 
spent  in  vain  if  we  do  not  know  how  to  utilize  it.  Karma-yoga  makes  a  science 
of  work;  you  learn  by  it  how  best  to  utilize  all  the  activities  of  this  world.  Work 
is  inevitable;  it  must  be  so.  But  we  should  work  to  the  highest  purpose. 

Work  incessantly,  but  give  up  all  attachment  to  work.  Do  not  identify  your¬ 
self  with  anything.  Hold  your  mind  free.  All  this  that  you  see,  the  pains  and 


192 


Vivekananda 


miseries,  are  but  the  necessary  conditions  of  this  world.  Poverty  and  wealth  and 
happiness  are  but  momentary;  they  do  not  belong  to  our  real  nature  at  all.  Our 
nature  is  far  beyond  misery  and  happiness,  beyond  every  object  of  the  senses, 
beyond  the  imagination;  and  yet  we  must  go  on  working  all  the  time.  Misery 
comes  through  attachment,  not  through  work.  As  soon  as  we  identify  ourselves 
with  the  work  we  do,  we  feel  miserable;  but  if  we  do  not  identify  ourselves  with 
it,  we  do  not  feel  that  misery. 

Each  wave  in  the  mind  that  says  “I”  and  “mine”  immediately  puts  a  chain 
round  us  and  makes  us  slaves;  and  the  more  we  say  “I”  and  “mine,”  the  more 
our  slavery  grows,  the  more  our  misery  increases.  Therefore  karma-yoga  tells  us 
to  enjoy  the  beauty  of  all  things  in  the  world,  but  not  to  identify  ourselves  with 
any  one  of  them. 

Non-attachment  does  not  mean  anything  that  we  may  do  in  relation  to  our 
external  body;  it  is  all  in  the  mind.  If  we  have  no  link  with  the  body  and  with 
the  things  of  the  senses,  we  are  non-attached,  wherever  and  whatever  we  may 
be.  A  man  may  be  on  the  throne  and  perfectly  non-attached;  another  man 
may  be  in  rags  and  still  very  much  attached.  First  we  have  to  attain  this  state 
of  non-attachment,  and  then  to  work  incessantly.  Karma-yoga  gives  us  the 
method  that  will  help  us  in  giving  up  all  attachment,  though  it  is  very  hard. 

Here  are  two  ways  of  giving  up  attachment.  The  one  is  for  those  who  do 
not  believe  in  God  or  in  any  outside  help.  They  are  left  to  their  own  devices; 
they  have  simply  to  work  with  their  own  will,  with  the  powers  of  their  mind 
and  discrimination,  saying,  “I  must  be  non-attached.”  For  those  who  believe 
in  God  there  is  another  way,  which  is  much  less  difficult.  They  give  up  the 
fruit  of  work  unto  the  Lord;  they  work  and  are  never  attached  to  the  results. 
Whatever  they  see,  feel,  hear,  or  do  is  for  Him.  Let  us  not  claim  any  praise  or 
benefit  for  whatever  work  we  may  do.  It  is  the  Lord’s;  give  up  the  fruit  unto 
Him. 

Karma-yoga  teaches  us  how  to  work  for  work’s  sake,  unattached,  without 
caring  who  is  helped,  and  it  also  teaches  us  why  we  should  work.  The  karma- 
yogi  works  because  it  is  his  nature,  because  he  feels  it  is  good  for  him  to  do  so, 
and  he  has  no  object  beyond  that.  His  position  in  the  world  is  that  of  a  giver, 
and  he  never  cares  to  receive  anything.  He  knows  that  he  is  giving,  and  does 
not  ask  for  anything  in  return,  and  therefore  he  eludes  the  grasp  of  misery. 

The  karma-yogi  need  not  believe  in  any  doctrine  whatever.  He  may  even  not 
believe  in  God,  may  not  ask  what  his  soul  is  or  indulge  in  any  metaphysical 
speculation.  He  has  his  own  special  method  of  realizing  selflessness,  and  he  has 
to  work  it  out  himself.  Every  moment  of  his  life  must  be  realization,  because 
he  has  to  solve  by  mere  work,  without  the  help  of  doctrine  or  theory,  the  very 
same  problem  to  which  the  jnani  applies  his  reason,  and  the  bhakta  his  love. 

I  have  been  told  many  times  that  a  man  cannot  work  if  he  does  not  have 


Appendix  193 

the  passion  which  we  generally  feel  for  work.  I  also  thought  that  way  years  ago; 
but  as  I  am  growing  older  and  getting  more  experience,  I  find  that  it  is  not 
true.  The  less  passion  there  is,  the  better  we  work.  The  calmer  we  are,  the 
better  it  is  for  us  and  the  greater  is  the  amount  of  work  we  can  do.  When  we 
let  loose  our  feelings  we  waste  so  much  energy,  shatter  our  nerves,  disturb  our 
minds,  and  accomplish  very  little.  The  energy  which  ought  to  have  gone  into 
work  is  spent  as  mere  feeling,  which  counts  for  nothing.  It  is  only  when 
the  mind  is  very  calm  and  collected  that  the  whole  of  its  energy  is  spent 
in  doing  good  work.  And  if  you  read  the  lives  of  the  great  workers  whom 
the  world  has  produced,  you  will  find  that  they  were  wonderfully  calm  men. 
Nothing  could  throw  them  off  their  balance.  That  is  why  the  man  who  becomes 
angry  never  does  a  great  amount  of  work,  and  the  man  whom  nothing  can  make 
angry  accomplishes  so  much.  The  man  who  gives  way  to  anger  or  hatred  or  any 
other  passion  cannot  work;  he  only  breaks  himself  to  pieces  and  does  nothing 
practical.  It  is  the  calm,  forgiving,  equable,  well-balanced  mind  that  does  the 
greatest  amount  of  work. 

BHAKTI,  OR  LOVE  OF  GOD 

Bhakti-yoga  is  a  real,  genuine  search  after  the  Lord,  a  search  beginning,  con¬ 
tinuing,  and  ending  in  love.  One  single  moment  of  the  madness  of  extreme  love 
of  God  brings  us  eternal  freedom. 

“Bhakti  is  intense  love  of  God/'  “When  a  man  gets  it  he  loves  all,  hates 
none;  he  becomes  satisfied  for  ever.”  This  love  cannot  be  reduced  to  any 
earthly  benefit,  because  so  long  as  worldly  desires  last,  this  kind  of  love  does 
not  come. 

There  is  bhakti  within  you,  only  a  veil  of  lust-and-wealth  covers  it,  and  as 
soon  as  that  is  removed,  bhakti  will  manifest  by  itself. 

One  way  of  attaining  bhakti  is  by  repeating  the  name  of  God  a  number  of 
times.  Mantras  have  an  effect — the  mere  repetition  of  words.  ...  To  obtain 
bhakti,  seek  the  company  of  holy  men  who  have  bhakti,  and  read  books  like  the 
Gita  and  The  Imitation  of  Christ.  Always  think  of  the  attributes  of  God. 

The  daily  necessary  thoughts  can  all  be  associated  with  God:  Eat  to  Him, 
drink  to  Him,  sleep  to  Him,  see  Him  in  all.  Talk  of  God  to  others;  this  is  most 
beneficial. 

Bhakti-yoga  does  not  say,  “Give  up”;  it  only  says,  “Love;  love  the  Highest.” 
And  everything  low  naturally  falls  away  from  him  the  object  of  whose  love  is  the 
Highest. 

If  a  man  does  not  get  food  one  day,  he  is  troubled;  if  his  son  dies,  how 
agonizing  it  is  to  him!  The  true  bhakta  feels  the  same  pangs  in  his  heart  when 
he  yearns  for  God.  The  great  quality  of  bhakti  is  that  it  cleanses  the  mind;  and 


194  Vivekananda 

bhakti  for  the  Supreme  Lord,  firmly  established,  is  alone  sufficient  to  purify  the 
mind. 

Bhakti  differs  from  the  Western  idea  of  religion  in  that  bhakti  admits  no 
element  of  fear,  no  Being  to  be  appeased  or  propitiated.  There  are  even  bhaktas 
who  worship  God  as  their  own  child  so  that  there  may  remain  no  feeling  even 
of  awe  or  reverence.  There  can  be  no  fear  in  true  love;  so  long  as  there  is  the 
least  fear,  bhakti  cannot  even  begin.  In  bhakti  there  is  also  no  place  for  begging 
or  bargaining  with  God.  The  idea  of  asking  God  for  anything  is  sacrilege  to  a 
bhakta.  He  will  not  pray  for  health  or  wealth  or  even  to  go  to  heaven. 

“Lord,  they  build  high  temples  in  Thy  name;  they  make  gifts  in  Thy  name. 
I  am  poor;  I  have  nothing;  so  I  take  this  body  of  mine  and  place  it  at  Thy  feet. 
Do  not  give  me  up,  O  Lord!”  Such  is  the  prayer  proceeding  out  of  the  depths 
of  the  bhakta’s  heart.  To  him  who  has  experienced  it,  this  eternal  sacrifice  of 
the  self  unto  the  beloved  Lord  is  higher  by  far  than  all  wealth  and  power,  than 
all  soaring  thoughts  of  renown  and  enjoyment. 

When  the  devotee  has  realized  his  Ideal,  he  is  no  more  impelled  to  ask 
whether  God  can  be  demonstrated  or  not,  whether  He  is  omnipotent  and 
omniscient  or  not.  To  him  He  is  only  the  God  of  Love.  He  is  the  highest  ideal 
of  love,  and  that  is  sufficient  for  all  his  purposes.  God,  as  love,  is  self-evident; 
it  requires  no  proof  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  the  beloved  to  the  lover. 
The  magistrate  God  of  other  forms  of  religion  may  require  a  good  deal  of  proof 
to  demonstrate,  but  the  bhakta  does  not  and  cannot  think  of  such  a  God  at  all. 
To  him  God  exists  entirely  as  love. 

The  perfected  bhakta  no  more  goes  to  see  God  in  temples  and  churches; 
he  knows  no  place  where  he  will  not  find  Him.  He  finds  Him  outside  the  temple 
as  well  as  in  the  temple;  he  finds  Him  in  the  wicked  man's  wickedness  as  well 
as  in  the  saint’s  saintliness,  because  he  has  Him  already  seated  in  glory  in  his 
own  heart  as  the  one  almighty,  inextinguishable  Light  of  Love,  which  is  ever 
shining  and  eternally  present. 

We  all  have  to  begin  as  dualists  in  the  religion  of  love.  God  is  to  us  a  separate 
Being,  and  we  feel  ourselves  to  be  separate  beings  also.  Love  then  comes  in 
between,  and  man  begins  to  approach  God;  and  God  also  comes  nearer  and 
nearer  to  man.  Man  takes  up  all  the  various  relationships  of  life,  such  as  those  of 
father,  mother,  son,  friend,  master,  and  lover,  and  projects  them  on  his  ideal  of 
love,  on  his  God.  To  him  God  exists  as  all  these.  And  the  last  point  of  his 
progress  is  reached  when  he  feels  that  he  has  become  absolutely  merged  in  the 
object  of  his  worship. 

I  know  one  whom  the  world  used  to  call  mad,  and  this  was  his  answer:  “My 
friends,  the  whole  world  is  a  lunatic  asylum:  some  are  mad  after  worldly  love, 
some  after  name,  some  after  fame,  some  after  money,  some  after  salvation  and 
going  to  heaven.  In  this  big  lunatic  asylum  I  too  am  mad;  I  am  mad  after 
God.  You  are  mad;  so  am  I.  I  think  my  madness  is  after  all  the  best.” 


Appendix 


195 


MEDITATION 

The  meditative  state  is  the  highest  state  of  existence.  So  long  as  there  is 
desire  no  real  happiness  can  come.  It  is  only  the  contemplative,  witness-like 
study  of  objects  that  brings  to  us  real  enjoyment  and  happiness.  The  animal  has 
its  happiness  in  the  senses,  man  in  his  intellect,  and  the  god  in  spiritual  con¬ 
templation.  It  is  only  to  the  soul  that  has  attained  to  this  contemplative  state 
that  the  world  really  becomes  beautiful.  To  him  who  desires  nothing,  and  does 
not  mix  himself  up  with  them,  the  manifold  changes  of  nature  are  one  panorama 
of  beauty  and  sublimity. 

First  the  practice  of  meditation  has  to  proceed  with  some  one  object  before 
the  mind.  Once  I  used  to  concentrate  my  mind  on  a  black  point.  In  the  end, 
I  could  not  see  the  point  any  more  or  feel  that  the  point  was  before  me  at  all; 
the  mind  had  ceased  to  exist;  no  wave  or  mental  state  would  arise — as  if  it  were 
all  an  ocean  without  any  breath  of  air.  In  that  state  I  used  to  experience  glimpses 
of  supersensuous  truth.  So,  I  think,  the  practice  of  meditation  even  on  some 
trifling  external  object  leads  to  mental  concentration.  But  it  is  true  that  the 
mind  very  easily  attains  calmness  when  one  practises  meditation  on  something 
on  which  one's  mind  is  most  apt  to  settle  down.  This  is  why  we  have  in  India 
so  much  worship  of  gods  and  goddesses.  .  .  .  The  fact  is,  however,  that  the 
objects  of  meditation  can  never  be  the  same  with  all  men.  People  have  pro¬ 
claimed  and  preached  to  others  only  those  external  objects  to  which  they  them¬ 
selves  held  in  order  to  become  perfected  in  meditation.  Oblivious  of  the  fact  that 
these  objects  are  merely  aids  to  the  attainment  of  perfect  mental  calmness,  men 
have  extolled  them,  later,  beyond  everything  else.  They  have  wholly  concerned 
themselves  with  the  means,  remaining  comparatively  unmindful  of  the  end. 
The  real  aim  is  to  make  the  mind  functionless;  but  this  cannot  be  done  unless 
one  first  becomes  absorbed  in  some  object. 

You  must  keep  the  mind  fixed  on  one  object;  meditation  should  be  like 
an  unbroken  stream  of  oil.  The  ordinary  man's  mind  is  scattered  on  different 
objects,  and  at  the  time  of  meditation,  too,  the  mind  is  at  first  apt  to  wander. 
Let  any  desire  whatever  arise  in  the  mind;  sit  calmly  and  watch  what  sorts  of 
ideas  are  coming.  By  continuing  to  watch  in  that  way,  the  mind  becomes  calm 
and  there  are  no  thought-waves  in  it.  These  waves  represent  the  thought-activity 
of  the  mind.  Those  things  that  you  have  previously  thought  about  too  deeply 
have  transformed  themselves  into  a  subconscious  current,  and  therefore  they 
come  up  in  the  mind  in  meditation.  The  rise  of  these  waves,  or  thoughts,  dur¬ 
ing  meditation  is  evidence  that  your  mind  is  tending  towards  concentration. 

Think  always  that  you  are  the  omnipresent  Atman.  “I  am  neither  the  body 
nor  the  mind  nor  the  buddhi  (the  determinative  faculty),  neither  the  gross  nor 
the  subtle  body" — by  this  process  of  elimination  immerse  your  mind  in  the 
transcendental  Knowledge  which  is  your  real  nature.  Kill  the  mind  by  thus 
plunging  it  repeatedly  in  this  Knowledge.  Then  only  will  you  realize  the 
Essence  of  Intelligence  and  be  established  in  your  real  nature.  Knower  and 


196 


Vivekananda 


known,  meditator  and  object  meditated  upon,  will  then  become  one,  and  the 
cessation  of  all  phenomenal  superimpositions  will  follow.  .  .  .  There  is  no  rela¬ 
tive  or  conditional  knowledge  in  this  state.  When  the  Atman  is  the  only  knower, 
by  what  means  can  you  possibly  know  It?  The  Atman  is  knowledge,  the  Atman 
is  intelligence,  the  Atman  is  Satchidananda. 

How  has  all  the  knowledge  in  the  world  been  gained  but  by  the  concentra¬ 
tion  of  the  powers  of  the  mind?  The  world  is  ready  to  give  up  its  secrets  if  we 
only  know  how  to  knock,  how  to  give  it  the  necessary  blow.  The  strength  and 
force  of  the  blow  come  through  concentration.  There  is  no  limit  to  the  power  of 
the  human  mind.  The  more  concentrated  it  is,  the  more  power  is  brought  to 
bear  on  one  point;  that  is  the  secret. 

How  are  we  to  know  that  the  mind  has  become  concentrated?  The  idea 
of  time  will  vanish.  The  more  time  passes  unnoticed,  the  more  concentrated  we 
are.  In  common  life  we  see  that  when  we  are  interested  in  a  book  we  do  not 
note  the  time  at  all,  and  when  we  leave  the  book  we  are  often  surprised  to  find 
how  many  hours  have  passed.  All  time  will  have  the  tendency  to  stand  in  the 
present.  So  the  definition  is  given:  when  the  past  and  present  become  one,  the 
mind  is  said  to  be  concentrated. 

Concentration  is  the  essence  of  all  knowledge;  nothing  can  be  done  without 
it.  Ninety  per  cent  of  his  thought-force  is  wasted  by  the  ordinary  human  being, 
and  therefore  he  is  constantly  committing  blunders;  the  trained  man  or  mind 
never  makes  a  mistake. 

MIND  AND  THOUGHT 

When  your  mind  has  become  controlled  you  have  control  over  the  whole 
body;  instead  of  being  a  slave  to  this  machine,  the  machine  is  your  slave.  Instead 
of  the  machine's  being  able  to  drag  the  soul  down,  it  becomes  its  greatest 
helpmate. 

When  the  mind  is  free  from  activity  or  functioning,  it  vanishes  and  the 
Self  is  revealed.  This  state  has  been  described  by  the  commentator  Sankara 
as  aparokshanubhuti,  or  supersensuous  experience. 

We  are  what  our  thoughts  have  made  us;  so  take  care  what  you  think. 

Every  vicious  thought  will  rebound,  every  thought  of  hatred  which  you  have 
thought,  even  in  a  cave,  is  stored  up  and  will  one  day  come  back  to  you  with 
tremendous  pow'er  in  the  form  of  some  misery  here.  If  you  project  hatred  and 
jealousy,  they  will  rebound  on  you  with  compound  interest.  No  power  can 
avert  them;  when  once  you  have  put  them  in  motion,  you  will  have  to  bear 
their  fruit.  Remembering  this  will  prevent  you  from  doing  wicked  things. 


Appendix  197 

We  are  heirs  to  all  the  good  thoughts  of  the  universe  if  we  open  ourselves  to 
them. 


ONENESS 

He  indeed  is  a  yogi  who  sees  himself  in  the  whole  universe  and  the  whole 
universe  in  himself. 

Not  one  atom  in  the  universe  can  move  without  dragging  the  whole  world 
along  with  it.  There  cannot  be  any  progress  without  the  whole  world’s  follow¬ 
ing  in  its  wake;  and  it  is  becoming  clearer  every  day  that  the  solution  of  any 
problem  can  never  be  attained  on  racial  or  national  or  any  narrow  grounds. 

I  am  thoroughly  convinced  that  no  individual  or  nation  can  live  by  holding 
itself  apart  from  the  community  of  others;  whenever  such  an  attempt  has  been 
made,  under  the  false  notion  of  greatness,  policy,  or  holiness,  the  result  has 
always  been  disastrous  to  the  one  who  thus  secluded  himself. 

Each  is  responsible  for  the  evil  anywhere  in  the  world. 

All  that  unites  with  the  universal  is  virtue.  All  that  separates  is  sin. 

Not  one  can  be  happy  until  all  are  happy. 

When  you  hurt  anyone  you  hurt  yourself,  for  you  and  your  brother  are  one. 

DUTY 

To  give  an  objective  definition  of  duty  is  entirely  impossible.  Yet  there  is  duty 
from  the  subjective  side.  Any  action  that  makes  us  go  Godward  is  a  good  action 
and  is  our  duty;  any  action  that  takes  us  away  from  God  is  evil  and  is  not  our 
duty. 

By  doing  well  the  duty  which  is  nearest  to  us,  the  duty  which  is  in  our  hands 
now,  we  make  ourselves  stronger;  and  improving  ourselves  in  this  manner,  step 
by  step,  we  may  even  reach  a  state  in  which  it  will  be  our  privilege  to  do  the 
most  coveted  and  honoured  duties  in  life  and  in  society. 

No  man  can  long  occupy  satisfactorily  a  position  for  which  he  is  not  fitted. 
There  is  no  use  in  grumbling  against  nature’s  adjustment.  He  who  does  the 
lower  work  is  not  therefore  a  lower  man.  No  man  is  to  be  judged  by  the  mere 
nature  of  his  duties;  but  all  should  be  judged  by  the  manner  and  the  spirit 
in  which  they  perform  them. 

It  is  the  worker  attached  to  results  who  grumbles  about  the  nature  of  the 
duty  which  has  fallen  to  his  lot;  to  the  unattached  worker  all  duties  are  equally 


Vivekananda 


198 

good,  and  form  efficient  instruments  with  which  selfishness  and  sensuality  may 
be  killed  and  the  freedom  of  the  soul  secured. 

Duty  is  seldom  sweet.  It  is  only  when  love  greases  its  wheels  that  it  runs 
smoothly;  it  is  a  continuous  friction  otherwise.  How  else  could  parents  do  their 
duty  to  their  children,  husbands  to  their  wives,  and  vice  versa?  Do  we  not 
meet  with  cases  of  friction  every  day  in  our  lives?  Duty  is  sweet  only  through 
love. 

Duty,  as  it  is  commonly  understood,  becomes  a  disease  with  us;  it  drags  us 
ever  onward.  It  catches  hold  of  us  and  makes  our  whole  life  miserable.  It  is 
the  bane  of  human  life.  This  idea  of  duty  is  like  the  midday  summer  sun; 
it  scorches  the  innermost  soul  of  mankind.  Look  at  those  poor  slaves  to  duty! 
Duty  leaves  them  no  time  to  say  prayers,  no  time  to  bathe.  Duty  is  ever  on 
them.  They  go  out  and  work — duty  is  on  them!  They  come  home  and  think 
of  the  work  for  the  next  day — duty  is  on  them!  It  is  living  a  slave’s  life,  and 
at  last  dropping  down  in  the  street  and  dying  in  harness,  like  a  horse.  This  is 
duty  as  it  is  understood.  The  only  true  duty  is  to  be  unattached  and  to  work 
as  free  beings,  to  give  up  all  works  unto  God. 

Every  duty  is  holy,  and  devotion  to  duty  is  the  highest  form  of  worship 
of  God. 


SERVICE 

This  is  the  gist  of  all  worship:  to  be  good  and  to  do  good  to  others.  He  who 
sees  Siva  in  the  poor,  in  the  weak,  and  in  the  diseased  really  worships  Siva;  and  if 
he  sees  Siva  only  in  the  image,  his  worship  is  but  preliminary.  He  who  has  served 
and  helped  one  poor  man,  seeing  Siva  in  him,  without  thinking  of  his  caste 
or  creed  or  race,  or  anything,  with  him  Siva  is  more  pleased  than  He  is  with 
the  man  who  sees  Him  only  in  temples. 

Selfishness  is  the  chief  sin:  thinking  of  ourselves  first.  He  who  thinks,  “I 
will  eat  first,  I  will  have  more  money  than  others,  and  I  will  possess  everything”; 
he  who  thinks,  “I  will  go  to  heaven  before  others,  I  will  get  mukti  before 
others,”  is  the  selfish  man.  The  unselfish  man  says,  “I  will  be  last;  I  do  not  care 
to  go  to  heaven;  I  will  go  to  hell  if  by  doing  so  I  can  help  my  brothers.”  This 
unselfishness  is  the  test  of  religion. 

Do  you  love  your  fellow  men?  Where  should  you  go  to  seek  for  God — are 
not  all  the  poor,  the  miserable,  the  weak,  Gods?  Why  not  worship  them  first? 
WTiy  go  to  dig  a  well  on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges? 

It  is  our  privilege  to  be  allowed  to  be  charitable,  for  only  so  can  we  grow.  The 
poor  man  suffers  that  we  may  be  helped.  Let  the  giver  kneel  down  and  give 
thanks;  let  the  receiver  stand  up  and  permit.  See  the  Lord  back  of  every  being 
and  give  to  Him. 


Appendix  199 

Selfishness  is  the  Devil  incarnate  in  every  man.  Every  bit  of  self  is  of  the 
Devil.  Take  away  self  on  one  side  and  God  enters  by  the  other. 

The  highest  ideal  is  eternal  and  entire  self-abnegation,  where  there  is  no  “I” 
but  all  is  “Thou.” 

Are  you  unselfish?  That  is  the  question.  If  you  are,  you  will  be  perfect  without 
reading  a  single  religious  book,  without  going  into  a  single  church  or  temple. 


NON-INJURY 

Never  producing  pain  by  thought,  word,  or  deed,  in  any  living  being,  is 
what  is  called  ahimsa,  non-injury.  There  is  no  virtue  higher  than  non-injury. 
There  is  no  happiness  higher  than  that  which  a  man  obtains  by  this  attitude 
of  non-off ensiveness  to  all  creation. 

The  test  of  ahimsa  is  absence  of  jealousy.  Any  man  may  do  a  good  deed  or  make 
a  good  gift  on  the  spur  of  the  moment  or  under  the  pressure  of  some  superstition 
or  priestcraft;  but  the  real  lover  of  mankind  is  he  who  is  jealous  of  none.  The 
so-called  great  men  of  the  world  are  seen  to  become  jealous  of  each  other  for  a 
small  name,  for  a  little  fame,  and  for  a  few  bits  of  gold.  So  long  as  this  jealousy 
exists  in  a  heart,  it  is  far  away  from  the  perfection  of  ahimsa.  .  .  .  The  man  who 
will  mercilessly  cheat  widows  and  orphans,  and  do  the  vilest  deeds  for  money,  is 
worse  than  any  brute,  even  if  he  lives  entirely  on  vegetables.  The  man  whose  heart 
never  cherishes  even  the  thought  of  injury  to  anyone,  who  rejoices  at  the  pros¬ 
perity  of  even  his  greatest  enemy,  that  man  is  a  bhakta,  he  is  a  yogi,  he  is  the  guru 
of  all,  even  though  he  lives  every  day  on  the  flesh  of  swine.  Therefore  we  must 
always  remember  that  external  practices  have  value  only  as  they  help  to  develop 
internal  purity.  It  is  better  to  have  internal  purity  alone,  when  minute  attention 
to  external  observances  is  not  practicable.  But  woe  unto  the  man  and  woe  unto 
the  nation  that  forgets  the  real,  internal,  spiritual  essentials  of  religion  and 
mechanically  clutches  with  death-like  grasp  external  forms  and  never  lets 
them  go! 

Non-injury  has  to  be  attained  by  him  who  would  be  free.  No  one  is  more 
powerful  than  he  who  has  attained  perfect  non-injury.  No  one  could  fight,  no 
one  could  quarrel,  in  his  presence.  Yes,  his  very  presence  means  peace,  means 
love,  wherever  he  may  be.  Nobody  could  be  angry  or  fight  in  his  presence. 
Even  animals,  ferocious  animals,  would  be  peaceful  before  him. 


KARMA  AND  REBIRTH 

Any  word,  any  action,  any  thought  that  produces  an  effect  is  called  karma. 
Thus  the  law  of  karma  means  the  law  of  causation,  of  inevitable  cause  and 
effect.  Whatever  we  see  or  feel  or  do,  whatever  action  there  is  anywhere  in  the 


200 


Vivekananda 


universe,  while  being  the  effect  of  past  work  on  the  one  hand,  becomes,  on  the 
other,  a  cause  in  its  turn  and  produces  its  own  effect.  Each  one  of  us  is  the 
effect  of  an  infinite  past.  The  child  is  ushered  into  the  world  not  as  something 
flashing  from  the  hands  of  nature,  as  poets  delight  so  much  to  depict,  but  he 
has  the  burden  of  an  infinite  past;  for  good  or  evil  he  comes  to  work  out  his 
own  past  deeds.  This  makes  the  differentiation.  This  is  the  law  of  karma.  Each 
one  of  us  is  the  maker  of  his  own  fate. 

The  idea  of  rebirth  runs  parallel  with  the  doctrine  of  the  eternity  of  the 
human  soul.  Nothing  that  ends  at  one  point  can  be  without  a  beginning, 
and  nothing  that  begins  at  one  point  can  be  without  an  end. 

How  is  it  that  one  man  is  born  of  good  parents,  receives  a  good  education, 
and  becomes  a  good  man,  while  another  comes  from  besotted  parents  and  ends 
on  the  gallows?  How  do  you  explain  this  inequality  without  implicating  God? 
Then,  too,  what  becomes  of  my  freedom  if  this  is  my  first  birth?  If  I  come  into 
this  world  without  experience  of  a  former  life,  my  independence  would  be  gone, 
for  my  path  would  be  marked  out  by  the  experience  of  others.  If  I  cannot  be 
the  maker  of  my  own  fortune,  then  I  am  not  free.  But  if  this  is  not  my  first 
birth,  I  can  take  upon  myself  the  blame  for  the  misery  of  this  life,  which  is 
the  result  of  the  evil  I  have  committed  in  another,  and  say  I  will  unmake  it. 
This,  then,  is  our  philosophy  of  the  migration  of  the  soul:  We  come  into  this 
life  with  the  experience  of  another,  and  the  fortune  or  misfortune  of  this 
existence  is  the  result  of  our  acts  in  a  former  existence;  and  thus  we  are  always 
becoming  better  till  at  last  perfection  is  reached. 

There  is  no  other  way  to  vindicate  the  glory  and  the  liberty  of  the  human  soul 
and  to  reconcile  the  inequalities  and  the  horrors  of  this  world,  than  to  place 
the  whole  burden  upon  the  legitimate  cause — our  own  independent  actions, 
or  karma.  Not  only  so,  but  every  theory  of  the  creation  of  the  soul  from  nothing 
inevitably  leads  to  fatalism  and  pre-ordination,  and  instead  of  a  Merciful  Father, 
places  before  us  a  hideous,  cruel,  and  ever  angry  God  to  worship. 


EDUCATION 

Education  is  the  manifestation  of  the  perfection  already  in  man. 

A  child  teaches  itself.  But  you  can  help  it  to  go  forward  in  its  own  way.  What 
you  can  do  is  not  of  a  positive  nature,  but  of  a  negative.  You  can  take  away 
the  obstacles,  but  knowledge  comes  from  within  the  child  itself.  .  .  .  You 
have  come  to  hear  me.  When  you  go  home,  reflect  on  what  you  have  learnt,  and 
you  will  find  that  you  yourself  have  thought  out  the  same  thing;  I  have  only 
given  it  expression.  I  can  never  teach  you  anything;  you  will  have  to  teach  your¬ 
self;  but  I  can  help  you,  perhaps,  in  giving  expression  to  that  thought. 

To  me  the  very  essence  of  education  is  concentration  of  mind,  not  the  col- 


201 


Appendix 

lecting  of  facts.  If  I  had  to  receive  my  education  over  again,  and  had  any  voice 
in  the  matter,  I  would  develop  the  power  of  concentration  and  detachment, 
and  then  with  a  perfect  instrument  I  could  collect  facts  at  will. 

Education  is  not  the  amount  of  information  that  is  put  into  your  brain  and 
runs  riot  there,  undigested,  all  your  life.  We  must  have  life-building,  man-mak¬ 
ing,  character-forming  assimilation  of  ideas.  If  you  have  assimilated  five  ideas 
and  made  them  your  life  and  character,  you  have  more  education  than  a  man 
who  has  got  by  heart  a  whole  library. 

All  the  knowledge  that  the  world  has  ever  received  comes  from  the  mind; 
the  infinite  library  of  the  universe  is  in  your  own  mind.  The  external  world  is 
simply  the  suggestion,  the  occasion,  which  sets  you  to  studying  your  own  mind; 
but  the  object  of  your  study  is  always  your  own  mind.  The  falling  of  an  apple 
gave  the  suggestion  to  Newton,  and  he  studied  his  own  mind;  he  rearranged 
all  the  previous  links  of  thought  in  his  mind  and  discovered  a  new  link  among 
them,  which  we  call  gravitation.  It  was  not  in  the  apple  or  in  anything  in  the 
centre  of  the  earth. 


HAPPINESS 

Can  any  permanent  happiness  be  given  to  the  world?  In  the  ocean  we  cannot 
raise  a  wave  without  causing  a  hollow  somewhere  else.  The  sum  total  of  the 
good  things  in  the  world  has  been  the  same  throughout  in  its  relation  to  man’s 
need  and  greed.  It  cannot  be  increased  or  decreased.  Take  the  human  race  as 
we  know  it  today.  Do  we  not  find  the  same  miseries  and  the  same  happiness, 
the  same  pleasures  and  pains,  the  same  differences  in  position,  as  in  the  past? 
Are  not  some  rich,  some  poor,  some  high,  some  low,  some  healthy,  some 
unhealthy?  All  this  was  the  same  with  the  Egyptians,  the  Greeks,  and  the 
Romans  in  ancient  times  as  it  is  with  the  Americans  today.  So  far  as  history 
is  known,  it  has  always  been  the  same. 

We  cannot  add  happiness  to  this  world;  similarly,  we  cannot  add  pain  to 
it  either.  The  sum  total  of  pleasure  and  pain  displayed  here  on  earth  will  be 
the  same  throughout.  We  just  push  it  from  this  side  to  the  other  side,  and  from 
that  side  to  this,  but  it  will  remain  the  same,  because  to  remain  so  is  its  very 
nature.  This  ebb  and  flow,  this  rising  and  falling,  is  the  world’s  very  nature;  it 
would  be  as  logical  to  hold  otherwise  as  to  say  that  we  may  have  life  without 
death. 

Philosophy  insists  that  there  is  a  Joy  which  is  absolute,  which  never  changes. 
That  Joy  cannot  be  the  same  as  the  joys  and  pleasures  we  have  in  this  life, 
and  yet  Vedanta  shows  that  everything  that  is  joyful  in  this  life  is  but  a  particle 
of  that  Real  Joy,  because  that  is  the  only  joy  there  is.  Every  moment  we  are 
enjoying  the  Absolute  Bliss,  though  covered  up,  misunderstood,  and  caricatured. 
Wherever  there  is  any  blessing,  blissfulness,  or  joy — even  the  joy  of  the  thief 


202 


Vivekananda 


in  stealing — it  is  a  manifestation  of  that  Absolute  Bliss,  only  it  has  become 
obscured,  muddled  up,  as  it  were,  with  all  sorts  of  extraneous  conditions,  and 
misunderstood. 

After  every  happiness  comes  misery;  they  may  be  far  apart  or  near.  The  more 
advanced  the  soul,  the  more  quickly  does  one  follow  the  other.  What  we  want 
is  neither  happiness  nor  misery.  Both  make  us  forget  our  true  nature;  both  are 
chains,  one  iron,  one  gold.  Behind  both  is  the  Atman,  who  knows  neither 
happiness  nor  misery. 

The  miseries  of  the  world  cannot  be  cured  by  physical  help  only.  Until  man's 
nature  changes,  these  physical  needs  will  arise  and  miseries  will  always  be  felt, 
and  no  amount  of  physical  help  will  cure  them  completely.  .  .  .  Let  men  have 
light,  let  them  be  pure  and  spiritually  strong  and  educated,  then  alone  will 
misery  cease  in  the  world,  and  not  before. 


BUDDHA 

Buddha  never  bowed  down  to  anything,  neither  to  Vedas,  nor  caste,  nor  priest, 
nor  custom.  He  fearlessly  reasoned  so  far  as  reason  could  take  him.  Such  a  fear¬ 
less  search  for  truth  and  such  love  for  every  living  thing  in  the  world  has  never 
been  seen. 

Buddha  was  the  first  who  dared  to  say:  “Believe  not  because  some  old  manu¬ 
scripts  tell  you  it  is  so;  believe  not  because  it  is  your  national  belief,  because 
you  have  been  made  to  believe  it  from  your  childhood.  But  reason  it  all  out, 
and  after  you  have  analysed  it,  then,  if  you  find  that  it  will  do  good  to  one  and 
all,  believe  it,  live  up  to  it,  and  help  others  to  live  up  to  it." 

Buddha  is  the  only  Prophet  who  said:  “I  do  not  care  to  know  your  various 
theories  about  God.  What  is  the  use  of  discussing  all  the  subtle  doctrines  about 
the  soul?  Do  good  and  be  good.  And  this  will  take  you  to  freedom  and  to  what¬ 
ever  truth  there  is." 

Buddha  said  about  himself:  “Buddha  is  the  name  of  infinite  knowledge, 
infinite  as  the  sky.  I,  Gautama,  have  reached  that  state;  you  will  reach  it  too  if 
you  struggle  for  it." 


CHRIST  AND  CHRISTIANITY 


That  soul  is  strong  which  has  become  one  with  the  Lord;  none  else  is  strong. 
What  do  you  think  was  the  cause  of  the  strength  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  that 
immense,  infinite  strength  which  laughed  at  traitors  and  blessed  those  that  were 
willing  to  murder  him?  It  was  his  knowledge  that  “I  and  my  Father  are  one"; 


Appendix  203 

it  was  his  prayer,  “Father,  just  as  I  am  one  with  You,  so  make  them  one 
with  me/' 

If  I,  as  an  Oriental,  have  to  worship  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  there  is  only  one  way 
left  to  me,  and  that  is  to  worship  him  as  God,  and  nothing  else. 

Let  the  churches  preach  doctrines,  theories,  philosophies,  to  their  hearts’  con¬ 
tent,  but  when  it  comes  to  worship,  the  real  practical  part  of  religion,  it  should 
be  as  Jesus  says:  “When  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy  closet;  and  when  thou  hast 
shut  the  door,  pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in  secret.” 

“Watch  and  pray,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand” — which  means, 
purify  your  minds  and  be  ready.  ...  You  recollect  that  the  Christians  are,  even 
in  the  darkest  days,  even  in  the  most  superstitious  Christian  countries,  always 
trying  to  prepare  themselves  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  by  trying  to  help 
others,  building  hospitals,  and  so  on.  So  long  as  the  Christians  keep  to  that 
ideal,  their  religion  lives. 

All  religions  are,  at  bottom,  alike.  This  is  so,  although  the  Christian  church, 
like  the  Pharisee  in  the  parable,  thanks  God  that  it  alone  is  right  and  thinks 
that  all  other  religions  are  wrong  and  in  need  of  Christian  light.  Christianity 
must  become  tolerant  before  the  world  will  be  willing  to  unite  with  the  Chris¬ 
tian  church  in  a  common  charity.  God  has  not  left  Himself  without  a  witness 
in  any  heart,  and  men,  especially  men  who  follow  Jesus  Christ,  should  be  willing 
to  admit  this.  In  fact,  Jesus  Christ  was  willing  to  welcome  every  good  man  to  the 
family  of  God.  It  is  not  the  man  who  believes  a  certain  thing,  but  the  man 
who  does  the  will  of  the  Father  in  heaven,  who  is  right.  On  this  basis — being 
right  and  doing  right — the  whole  world  can  unite. 


MOHAMMED  AND  ISLAM 

Mohammed  was  the  Prophet  of  equality,  of  the  brotherhood  of  man,  the 
brotherhood  of  all  Mussulmans. 

Mohammed  showed,  by  his  life,  that  amongst  Mohammedans  there  should 
be  perfect  equality  and  brotherhood.  There  was  no  question  of  race,  caste, 
colour,  or  sex.  The  Sultan  of  Turkey  may  buy  a  negro  from  the  mart  of  Africa 
and  bring  him  in  chains  to  Turkey;  but  should  he  become  a  Mohammedan 
and  have  sufficient  merit  and  abilities,  he  might  even  marry  the  daughter  of  the 
Sultan.  Compare  this  with  the  way  in  which  the  negroes  and  the  American 
Indians  are  treated  in  America!  And  what  do  the  Hindus  do?  If  a  low-caste 
Hindu  chances  to  touch  the  food  of  one  belonging  to  a  higher  caste,  the  latter 
throws  it  away.  Notwithstanding  our  grand  philosophy,  you  note  our  weakness 
in  practice;  but  there  you  see  the  greatness  of  the  Mohammedan,  beyond  other 
faiths,  showing  itself  in  equality,  perfect  equality,  regardless  of  race  or  colour. 


204 


Vivekananda 


As  soon  as  a  man  becomes  a  Mohammedan,  the  whole  of  Islam  receives  him 
as  a  brother,  with  open  arms,  without  making  any  distinction,  which  no  other 
religion  does.  If  one  of  your  American  Indians  becomes  a  Mohammedan,  the 
Sultan  of  Turkey  would  have  no  objection  to  dining  with  him.  If  he  has  brains, 
no  position  is  barred  to  him.  In  America  I  have  never  yet  seen  a  church  where 
the  white  man  and  the  negro  can  kneel  side  by  side  to  pray. 

For  our  own  motherland  a  junction  of  the  two  great  systems,  Hinduism  and 
Islam — Vedantic  brain  and  Islamic  body — is  the  only  hope.  ...  I  see  in  my 
mind's  eye  the  future  perfect  India  rising  out  of  this  chaos  and  strife,  glorious 
and  invincible,  with  Vedantic  brain  and  Islamic  body. 


THE  HINDUS  AND  HINDUISM 

In  India  there  never  was  any  religious  persecution  by  the  Hindus,  but  only  that 
wonderful  reverence  which  they  have  for  all  the  religions  of  the  world.  They 
sheltered  a  portion  of  the  Hebrews  when  the  latter  were  driven  out  of  their 
own  country;  and  the  Malabar  Jews  remain  as  a  result.  The  Hindus  received, 
at  another  time,  the  remnant  of  the  Persians  when  they  were  almost  annihilated; 
and  these  remain,  to  this  day,  as  a  part  of  us  and  loved  by  us,  as  the  modern 
Parsees  of  Bombay.  There  were  Christians  who  claimed  to  have  come  with  St. 
Thomas,  the  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ;  they  were  allowed  to  settle  in  India  and 
hold  their  own  opinions;  and  a  colony  of  them  is  even  now  in  existence  in  India. 
And  this  spirit  of  tolerance  has  not  died  out.  It  will  not  and  cannot  die  there. 

You  may  be  a  dualist,  and  I  may  be  a  monist;  you  may  believe  that  you  are 
the  eternal  servant  of  God,  and  I  may  declare  that  I  am  one  with  God  Himself — 
yet  both  of  us  are  good  Hindus.  How  is  that  possible?  Read  then:  "That  which 
exists  is  One;  sages  call  It  by  various  names." 

From  the  high  spiritual  flights  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy,  of  which  the  latest 
discoveries  of  science  seem  like  echoes,  to  the  low  ideas  of  idolatry  with  its 
multifarious  mythology,  the  agnosticism  of  the  Buddhists,  and  the  atheism  of 
the  Jains,  each  and  all  have  a  place  in  the  Hindu's  religion. 

The  religion  of  the  Hindus  does  not  consist  in  struggles  and  attempts  to 
believe  a  certain  doctrine  or  dogma,  but  in  realizing;  not  in  believing,  but  in 
becoming.  Thus  the  whole  object  of  their  system  is  by  constant  struggle  to 
become  perfect,  to  become  divine,  to  reach  God  and  see  God;  and  this  reaching 
God,  seeing  God,  becoming  perfect  as  the  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect,  constitutes 
the  religion  of  the  Hindus. 


THE  GITA 

The  greatness  of  little  things,  that  is  what  the  Gita  teaches,  bless  the  old 
bookl 


Appendix  205 

We  read  in  the  Bhagavad  Gita  again  and  again  that  we  must  all  work  inces¬ 
santly.  All  work  is  by  nature  composed  of  good  and  evil.  We  cannot  do  any  work 
which  will  not  do  some  good  somewhere;  there  cannot  be  any  work  which  will 
not  cause  some  harm  somewhere.  Every  action  must  necessarily  be  a  mixture 
of  good  and  evil;  yet  we  are  commanded  to  work  incessantly.  Good  and  evil 
will  both  have  their  results.  Good  action  will  entail  upon  us  a  good  effect;  bad 
action,  a  bad.  But  good  and  bad  are  both  bondages  of  the  soul.  The  solution 
reached  in  the  Gita  in  regard  to  this  bondage-producing  nature  of  work  is  that 
if  we  do  not  attach  ourselves  to  the  work  we  do,  it  will  not  have  any  binding 
effect  on  our  soul. 

This  is  the  one  cause  of  our  misery:  we  are  attached,  we  are  being  caught. 
Therefore,  says  the  Gita,  work  constantly.  Work  but  be  not  attached,  be  not 
caught.  Reserve  unto  yourself  the  power  of  detaching  yourself  from  everything, 
however  beloved,  however  much  the  soul  might  yearn  for  it;  however  great 
the  pangs  of  misery  you  feel  if  you  are  going  to  leave  it,  still,  reserve  the  power 
of  leaving  it  whenever  you  want. 

The  heart’s  love  is  due  to  only  one.  To  whom?  To  Him  who  never  changes. 
Sri  Krishna  says  in  the  Gita:  The  Lord  is  the  only  one  who  never  changes. 
His  love  never  fails.  Wherever  we  are  and  whatever  we  do,  He  is  ever  and  ever 
the  same  merciful,  the  same  loving  heart.  He  never  changes.  .  .  .  We  must  love 
Him — and  everyone  that  lives,  only  in  and  through  Him.  This  is  the  key-note. 

Ay,  if  there  is  anything  in  the  Gita  that  I  like,  it  is  the  two  verses,  coming 
out  strong  as  the  very  gist,  the  very  essence,  of  Krishna’s  teaching:  “He  who 
sees  the  Supreme  Lord  dwelling  alike  in  all  beings,  the  Imperishable  in  things 
that  perish,  he  sees  indeed.  For,  seeing  the  Lord  as  the  same,  everywhere  present, 
he  does  not  destroy  the  self  by  the  self,  and  thus  he  goes  to  the  highest  goal.” 


THE  UPANISHADS 

In  modern  language,  the  theme  of  the  Upanishads  is  to  find  an  ultimate  unity 
of  things.  Knowledge  is  nothing  but  finding  unity  in  the  midst  of  diversity. 
Every  science  is  based  upon  this;  all  human  knowledge  is  based  upon  the  finding 
of  unity  in  the  midst  of  diversity.  And  if  it  is  the  task  of  small  fragments  of 
human  knowledge,  which  we  call  our  sciences,  to  find  unity  in  the  midst  of 
a  few  different  phenomena,  the  task  becomes  stupendous  when  the  theme  before 
us  is  to  find  unity  in  the  midst  of  this  marvellously  diversified  universe,  where 
prevail  unnumbered  differences  in  name  and  form,  in  matter  and  spirit — each 
thought  differing  from  every  other  thought,  each  form  differing  from  every  other 
form.  Yet  to  harmonize  these  many  planes  and  unending  spheres,  to  find  unity 
in  the  midst  of  this  infinite  variety,  is  the  theme  of  the  Upanishads. 

“The  sun  does  not  shine  there,  nor  the  moon  and  the  stars,  nor  these  light¬ 
nings — not  to  speak  of  this  fire.”  What  poetry  in  the  world  can  be  more  sublime 
than  this?  Such  poetry  you  find  nowhere  else. 


206 


Vivekananda 


INDIA 

The  debt  which  the  world  owes  to  India  is  immense.  There  is  not  one  race 
on  this  earth  to  which  the  world  owes  so  much  as  it  owes  to  the  patient  Hindu, 
the  mild  Hindu. 

Gifts  of  political  knowledge  can  be  made  with  the  blast  of  trumpets  and 
the  march  of  cohorts.  Gifts  of  secular  knowledge  and  social  knowledge  can  be 
made  with  fire  and  sword.  But  spiritual  knowledge  can  only  be  given  in  silence, 
like  the  dew,  which  falls  unseen  and  unheard,  and  yet  brings  into  bloom  masses 
of  roses.  This  has  been  the  gift  of  India  to  the  world  again  and  again. 

The  one  characteristic  of  Indian  thought  is  its  silence,  its  calmness.  The 
tremendous  power  that  is  behind  it  is  never  expressed  by  violence. 

Shall  India  die?  Then  from  the  world  all  spirituality  will  be  extinct;  all  moral 
perfection  will  be  extinct;  all  sweet-souled  sympathy  for  religion  will  be  extinct; 
all  ideality  will  be  extinct;  and  in  their  place  will  reign  the  duality  of  lust  and 
luxury  as  the  male  and  female  deities,  with  money  as  its  priest;  fraud,  force, 
and  competition  its  ceremonies;  and  the  human  soul  its  sacrifice.  Such  a  thing 
can  never  be.  The  power  of  suffering  is  infinitely  greater  than  the  power  of 
doing;  the  power  of  love  is  of  infinitely  greater  potency  than  the  power  of  hatred. 


CAUSES  OF  INDIA'S  DOWNFALL 

I  consider  that  the  great  national  sin  is  the  neglect  of  the  masses,  and  that 
is  one  of  the  causes  of  our  downfall.  No  amount  of  politics  will  be  of  any  avail 
until  the  masses  in  India  are  once  more  well  educated,  well  fed,  and  well 
cared  for. 

Our  nation  is  totally  lacking  in  the  faculty  of  organization.  It  is  this  one  draw¬ 
back  which  produces  all  sorts  of  evil.  We  are  altogether  averse  to  making  a  com¬ 
mon  cause  for  anything.  The  first  requisite  for  organization  is  obedience. 

No  man,  no  nation,  can  hate  others  and  live.  India’s  doom  was  sealed  the 
very  day  they  invented  the  word  mlechcha  and  stopped  from  communion  with 
others.  Take  care  how  you  foster  that  idea.  It  is  easy  to  talk  about  Vedanta, 
but  how  hard  to  carry  out  even  its  least  precepts! 


THE  WAY  TO  INDIA’S  REGENERATION 


The  more  the  Hindus  study  the  past,  the  more  glorious  will  be  their  future, 
and  whoever  tries  to  bring  the  past  to  the  door  of  everyone  is  a  great  bene¬ 
factor  to  his  nation.  The  degeneration  of  India  came  not  because  the  laws  and 


Appendix  207 

customs  of  the  ancients  were  bad,  but  because  they  were  not  allowed  to  be  car¬ 
ried  to  their  legitimate  conclusions. 

Nowadays  everybody  blames  those  who  constantly  look  back  to  the  past. 
It  is  said  that  so  much  looking  back  to  the  past  is  the  cause  of  all  India’s  woes. 
To  me,  on  the  contrary,  it  seems  that  the  opposite  is  true.  So  long  as  they  forgot 
the  past,  the  Hindu  nation  remained  in  a  state  of  stupor;  and  as  soon  as  they 
have  begun  to  look  into  the  past,  there  is  on  every  side  a  fresh  manifestation 
of  life.  It  is  out  of  this  past  that  the  future  has  to  be  moulded;  this  past  will 
become  the  future. 

Our  method  is  very  easily  described.  It  simply  consists  in  reasserting  the 
national  life.  Buddha  preached  renunciation;  India  heard,  and  in  six  centuries 
she  reached  her  greatest  height.  The  secret  lies  there.  The  national  ideals  of 
India  are  renunciation  and  service.  Intensify  her  in  those  channels,  and  the  rest 
will  take  care  of  itself.  The  banner  of  the  spirit  cannot  be  raised  too  high 
in  this  country.  In  it  alone  is  salvation. 

First  bread  and  then  religion.  We  stuff  them  too  much  with  religion,  when 
the  poor  fellows  have  been  starving.  No  dogmas  will  satisfy  the  cravings  of 
hunger.  There  are  two  curses  here:  first,  our  physical  weakness,  secondly,  our 
jealousy,  our  dried-up  hearts.  You  may  talk  doctrines  by  the  millions,  you  may 
have  sects  by  the  hundreds  of  millions;  ay,  but  it  is  all  nothing  until  you  have 
the  heart  to  feel.  Feel  for  them,  as  your  Veda  teaches  you,  till  you  find  they 
are  parts  of  your  bodies,  till  you  realize  that  you  and  they,  the  poor  and  the  rich, 
the  saint  and  the  sinner,  are  all  parts  of  one  infinite  Whole,  which  you  call 
Brahman. 

You  must  all  set  your  shoulders  to  the  wheel!  Your  duty  at  present  is  to  go 
from  one  part  of  the  country  to  another,  from  village  to  village,  and  make  the 
people  understand  that  mere  sitting  about  idly  won’t  do  any  more.  Make  them 
understand  their  real  condition,  and  say:  “O  ye  brothers  all,  arise!  Awake!  How 
much  longer  will  you  remain  asleep?”  Go  and  advise  them  how  to  improve  their 
own  condition,  and  make  them  comprehend  the  sublime  truths  of  the  scriptures 
by  presenting  them  in  a  lucid  and  popular  way.  Also  instruct  them,  in  simple 
words,  about  the  necessities  of  life,  and  in  trade,  commerce,  agriculture,  and  so 
on.  If  you  cannot  do  this,  then  fie  upon  your  education  and  culture,  and  fie 
upon  your  study  of  the  Vedas  and  Vedanta! 

Religion  for  a  long  time  has  come  to  be  static  in  India;  what  we  want  is  to 
make  it  dynamic.  I  want  it  to  be  brought  into  the  life  of  everybody.  Religion,  as 
it  has  always  been  in  the  past,  must  enter  the  palaces  of  kings  as  well  as  the 
homes  of  the  poorest  peasants  in  the  land.  Religion,  the  common  inheritance, 
the  universal  birthright  of  the  race,  must  be  brought  free  to  the  door  of  every¬ 
body.  Religion  in  India  must  be  made  as  free  and  as  easy  of  access  as  is  God’s 
air.  And  this  is  the  kind  of  thing  we  have  to  bring  about  in  India — but  not  by 
getting  up  little  sects  and  fighting  on  points  of  difference.  Let  us  preach  where 


208 


Vivekananda 


we  all  agree,  and  leave  the  differences  to  remedy  themselves.  As  I  have  said 
again  and  again,  if  there  is  the  darkness  of  centuries  in  a  room,  and  we  go 
into  the  room  and  begin  to  cry,  “Oh,  it  is  dark,  it  is  dark!" — will  the  darkness 
go?  Bring  in  light  and  the  darkness  will  vanish  at  once. 

We  have  to  learn  from  others.  You  put  the  seed  in  the  ground  and  give  it 
plenty  of  earth  and  air  and  water  to  feed  upon;  when  the  seed  grows  into  the 
plant,  and  into  a  gigantic  tree,  does  it  become  the  earth,  does  it  become  the 
air,  or  does  it  become  the  water?  It  becomes  the  mighty  plant,  the  mighty  tree, 
after  its  own  nature,  having  absorbed  everything  that  was  given  to  it.  Let  that 
be  your  position.  We  have  indeed  many  things  to  learn  from  others;  yea,  that 
man  who  refuses  to  learn  is  already  dead. 

Then  only  will  India  awake  when  hundreds  of  large-hearted  men  and  women, 
giving  up  all  desire  of  enjoying  the  luxuries  of  life,  shall  long  and  exert  them¬ 
selves  to  the  utmost  for  the  well-being  of  the  millions  of  their  countrymen  who 
are  gradually  sinking  lower  and  lower  in  the  vortex  of  destitution  and  ignorance. 
I  have  experienced  even  in  my  insignificant  life  that  good  motives,  sincerity,  and 
infinite  love  can  conquer  the  world.  One  single  soul  possessed  of  these  virtues 
can  destroy  the  dark  designs  of  millions  of  hypocrites  and  brutes. 

Let  the  New  India  arise — out  of  the  cottage  of  the  peasant  grasping  the 
plough,  out  of  the  huts  of  the  fisherman,  the  cobbler,  and  the  sweeper.  Let  her 
spring  from  the  grocer’s  shop,  from  beside  the  oven  of  the  fritter-seller.  Let  her 
emanate  from  the  factory,  from  marts  and  from  markets.  Let  her  emerge  from 
the  groves  and  forests,  from  hills  and  mountains.  These  common  people  have 
suffered  oppression  for  thousands  of  years — suffered  it  without  a  murmur — 
and  as  a  result  have  got  wonderful  fortitude.  They  have  suffered  eternal  misery, 
which  has  given  them  unflinching  vitality.  Living  on  a  handful  of  oatmeal  they 
can  convulse  the  world;  give  them  only  half  a  piece  of  bread,  and  the  whole 
world  will  not  be  big  enough  to  contain  their  energy.  And  besides,  they  have 
got  the  wonderful  strength  that  comes  of  a  pure  and  moral  life  which  is  not 
to  be  found  anywhere  else  in  the  world.  Such  peacefulness,  such  contentment, 
such  love,  such  power  of  silent  and  incessant  work,  and  such  a  manifestation 
of  a  lion’s  strength  in  times  of  action — where  else  will  you  find  these? 

Do  you  know  what  my  idea  is?  By  preaching  the  profound  secrets  of  the 
Vedanta  religion  in  the  Western  world,  we  shall  attract  the  sympathy  and 
regard  of  these  mighty  nations,  maintaining  for  ourselves  the  position  of  their 
teacher  in  spiritual  matters;  let  them  remain  our  teachers  in  all  material  con¬ 
cerns.  .  .  .  Nothing  will  come  of  crying  day  and  night  before  them,  “Give  me 
this!’’  or  “Give  me  that!’’  When  there  grows  a  link  of  sympathy  and  regard 
between  both  nations  by  this  give-and-take  intercourse,  there  will  be  then  no 
need  for  these  noisy  cries.  They  will  do  everything  of  their  own  accord.  I  believe 
that  by  this  cultivation  of  religion  and  the  wider  diffusion  of  Vedanta,  both 
this  country  and  the  West  will  gain  enormously.  To  me  the  pursuit  of  politics 
is  a  secondary  means  in  comparison  with  this.  I  will  lay  down  my  life  to  carry 


Appendix  209 

out  this  belief  practically.  If  you  believe  in  any  other  way  of  accomplishing  the 
good  of  India,  well,  you  may  go  on  working  in  your  own  way. 


MISCELLANEOUS 

In  the  first  place,  I  would  ask  mankind  to  recognize  this  maxim:  Do  not 
destroy.  Break  not,  pull  not  anything  down,  but  build.  Help  if  you  can.  Do  not 
injure  if  you  cannot  render  help.  Secondly,  take  a  man  where  he  stands,  and 
from  there  give  him  a  lift. 

Remember  the  words  of  Christ:  “Ask  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you,  seek 
and  you  shall  find,  knock  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you.”  These  words  are 
literally  true,  not  figures  or  fiction.  They  were  the  outflow  of  the  heart’s  blood 
of  one  of  the  greatest  sons  of  God  who  ever  came  to  this  world  of  ours — words 
which  came  as  the  fruit  of  realization  from  a  man  who  had  felt  and  seen 
God,  who  had  spoken  with  God  a  hundred  times  more  intensely  than  you  or 
I  see  this  building. 

Truth  has  such  a  face  that  anyone  who  sees  that  face  becomes  convinced. 
The  sun  does  not  require  any  torch  to  show  it;  the  sun  is  self-sufficient.  If 
truth  requires  evidence,  what  will  evidence  that  evidence? 

The  yogis  say  that  man  can  go  beyond  his  direct  sense  perception  and  beyond 
his  reason  also.  Man  has  in  him  the  faculty,  the  power,  of  transcending  even  his 
intellect,  a  power  which  is  in  every  being,  every  creature.  By  the  practice  of  yoga 
that  power  is  aroused,  and  then  man  transcends  the  ordinary  limits  of  reason 
and  directly  perceives  things  which  are  beyond  all  reason. 

“Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God.”  In  that  one  sentence 
lies  the  gist  of  all  religions.  ...  It  alone  could  save  the  world  were  all  the  other 
scriptures  lost.  A  vision  of  God,  a  glimpse  of  the  Beyond,  never  comes  until 
the  soul  is  pure. 

He  who  comes  with  a  pure  heart  and  a  reverent  attitude  will  have  his  heart 
opened;  the  doors  will  open  for  him  and  he  will  see  the  Truth. 

It  is  very  easy  to  say,  “Don’t  be  personal”;  but  the  same  man  who  says  so  is 
generally  most  personal.  His  attachment  for  particular  men  and  women  is  very 
strong;  it  does  not  leave  him  when  they  die;  he  wants  to  follow  them  beyond 
death.  That  is  idolatry;  it  is  the  seed,  the  very  cause,  of  idolatry;  and  the  cause 
being  there,  it  will  come  out  in  some  form  or  other.  Is  it  not  better  to  have  a 
personal  attachment  to  an  image  of  Christ  or  Buddha  than  to  an  ordinary  man 
or  woman? 

Two  sorts  of  persons  do  not  require  any  image:  the  human  animal,  who  never 
thinks  of  any  religion,  and  the  perfected  being,  who  has  passed  through  the  dis- 


210  Vivekananda 

ciplinary  stages.  Between  these  two  points,  all  of  us  require  some  sort  of  image, 
outside  or  inside. 

All  these  forms  and  ceremonies,  these  prayers  and  pilgrimages,  these  books, 
bells,  candles,  and  priests,  are  the  preparations;  they  take  off  the  impurities 
of  the  soul;  and  when  the  soul  becomes  pure,  it  naturally  wants  to  get  to  the 
mine  of  purity,  God  Himself. 

No  great  work  can  be  achieved  by  humbug.  It  is  through  love,  a  passion  for 
truth,  and  tremendous  energy,  that  all  undertakings  are  accomplished.  There¬ 
fore  manifest  your  manhood. 

Vedanta  says  that  you  are  pure  and  perfect,  and  that  there  is  a  state  beyond 
good  and  evil,  and  that  that  is  your  own  nature.  It  is  higher  than  good.  Good 
is  only  a  lesser  differentiation  than  evil.  We  have  no  theory  of  evil.  We  call 
it  ignorance. 

One  characteristic  idea  of  Vedanta  is  that  we  must  allow  infinite  variation  in 
religious  thought,  and  not  try  to  bring  everybody  to  the  same  opinion,  because 
the  goal  is  the  same.  The  Vedantist  says  in  his  poetical  language:  '‘As  so  many 
rivers,  having  their  source  in  different  mountains,  roll  down,  crooked  or  straight, 
and  at  last  come  into  the  ocean,  so,  O  Lord,  all  these  various  creeds  and 
religions,  taking  their  start  from  different  standpoints  and  running  through 
courses  crooked  or  straight,  at  last  come  unto  Thee.” 

Materialism  says  that  the  voice  of  freedom  is  a  delusion.  Idealism  says  that 
the  voice  that  tells  of  bondage  is  a  delusion.  Vedanta  says  that  you  are  free  and 
not  free  at  the  same  time:  never  free  on  the  earthly  plane,  but  ever  free  on  the 
spiritual. 

Ye  are  the  children  of  God,  the  sharers  of  Immortal  Bliss,  holy  and  perfect 
beings.  Ye  divinities  on  earth — sinners!  It  is  a  sin  to  call  a  man  so;  it  is  a  stand¬ 
ing  libel  on  human  nature. 

You  may  invent  an  image  through  which  to  worship  God;  but  a  better 
image  already  exists — the  living  man.  You  may  build  a  temple  in  which  to 
worship  God,  and  that  may  be  good;  but  a  better  one,  a  much  higher  one, 
already  exists — the  human  body. 


GLOSSARY 


I 


GLOSSARY 


acharya  Religious  teacher. 

Advaita  Non-duality;  a  school  of  Vedanta  philosophy  teaching  the  oneness 
of  God,  soul,  and  universe,  whose  chief  exponent  was  Sankaracharya  (A.  D. 
788-820). 

ahimsa  Non-injury. 

Ananda  Bliss. 

Annapurna  A  name  of  the  Divine  Mother  as  the  Giver  of  Food. 

Arjuna  A  hero  of  the  epic  Mahabharata  and  a  friend  and  disciple  of  Krishna. 
Arya  Samaj  An  orthodox  Hindu  movement  founded  by  Swami  Dayananda 
(A.  D.  1824-1883). 

asrama  Hermitage;  also  any  one  of  the  four  stages  of  life:  the  celibate  student 
stage  (brahmacharya),  the  married  householder  stage  (garhasthya),  the  stage 
of  retirement  and  contemplation  (vanaprastha),  and  the  stage  of  religious 
mendicancy  (sannyasa). 

Atman  The  Self  or  Soul;  denotes  both  the  Supreme  Soul  and  the  individual 
soul,  which,  according  to  Non-dualistic  Vedanta,  are  ultimately  identical. 
Avatar  Incarnation  of  God. 

Bhagavad  Gita  An  important  Hindu  scripture,  comprising  eighteen  chapters 
of  the  epic  Mahabharata  and  containing  the  teachings  of  Sri  Krishna, 
bhakta  Devotee  of  God. 
bhakti  Love  of  God. 

bhakti-yoga  The  path  of  devotion  followed  by  dualistic  worshippers, 
bhakti-yogi  A  follower  of  the  path  of  devotion, 
bhoga  Enjoyment. 

bodhisattva  A  Buddhist  saint  on  his  way  to  the  attainment  of  Nirvana,  or 
final  illumination;  this  state  is  reached  through  a  long  series  of  unselfish  deeds. 
Bo-tree  The  famous  tree  under  which  Buddha  attained  illumination, 
brahmacharin  A  celibate  student  belonging  to  the  first  stage  of  life.  See  asrama. 
brahmacharini  A  woman  observing  the  vow  of  chastity, 
brahmacharya  The  first  of  the  four  stages  of  life;  the  life  of  an  unmarried 
student.  See  asrama. 

Brahman  The  Absolute;  the  Supreme  Reality  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy. 
Brahmana  That  portion  of  the  Vedas  which  gives  the  rules  for  the  employ¬ 
ment  of  the  hymns  at  the  various  sacrifices,  their  origin  and  detailed  explana¬ 
tion,  etc.  It  is  distinct  from  the  Mantra  portion  of  the  Vedas, 
brahmin  A  member  of  the  priestly  caste,  the  highest  caste  in  Hindu  society. 
Brahmo  A  member  of  the  Brahmo  Samaj. 

Brahmo  Samaj  A  liberal  Hindu  religious  movement  founded  by  Raja  Rammo- 
han  Roy  (A.  D.  1774-1883). 


211 


212  Vivekananda 

buddhi  The  determinative  faculty  of  the  mind,  which  makes  decisions;  some¬ 
times  translated  as  “intellect.” 

Chaitanya  A  prophet  born  in  A.  D.  1485,  who  lived  at  Navadvip,  Bengal,  and 
emphasized  the  path  of  divine  love  for  the  realization  of  God. 
chandala  Untouchable. 

Dakshineswar  A  village  near  Calcutta  where  Ramakrishna  lived  and  com¬ 
muned  with  God. 

darsanas  The  six  systems  of  orthodox  Hindu  philosophy,  namely,  the  Samkhya 
of  Kapila,  the  Yoga  of  Patanjali,  the  Vaiseshika  of  Kanada,  the  Nyaya  of 
Gautama,  the  Purva  Mimamsa  of  Jaimini,  and  the  Vedanta  or  Uttara 
Mimamsa  of  Vyasa. 

Dhammapada  A  famous  treatise  of  the  Buddhists. 

dharma  Righteousness,  duty;  the  inner  constitution  of  a  thing,  which  governs 
its  growth. 

Diwan  Prime  Minister  of  the  ruler  of  a  Native  State, 
duratman  Wicked  soul. 

Durga  A  name  of  the  Divine  Mother. 

garden  house  A  rich  man's  country  house  set  in  a  garden. 

Gita  Same  as  Bhagavad  Gita. 

gopis  The  cowherd  girls  of  Vrindavan,  playmates  of  Krishna, 
gunas  A  term  of  the  Samkhya  philosophy,  according  to  which  prakriti  (nature 
or  matter),  in  contrast  with  Purusha  (Soul),  consists  of  three  gunas — usually 
translated  as  “qualities” — known  as  sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas.  Tamas  stands 
for  inertia,  rajas  for  activity  and  restlessness,  and  sattva  for  balance  or  wisdom, 
guru  Spiritual  preceptor. 

Haldarpukur  A  lake  in  Kamarpukur,  Sri  Ramakrishna's  birthplace. 

Hari  An  epithet  of  the  Godhead. 

Holy  Mother  The  wife  of  Sri  Ramakrishna. 

Jains  The  followers  of  Jainism,  an  important  religious  sect  of  India, 
japa  Repetition  of  the  Lord's  name  or  of  a  sacred  formula  given  by  the  spiritual 
teacher. 

jiva  (Lit.,  living  being.)  The  individual  soul,  which  in  essence  is  one  with 
the  Universal  Soul. 

jivanmukta  One  who  has  attained  liberation  while  living  in  the  body, 
jivanmukti  Liberation  while  living  in  the  body. 

jnana  Knowledge  of  Reality  arrived  at  through  reasoning  and  discrimination; 

also  the  process  of  reasoning  by  means  of  which  Ultimate  Truth  is  attained, 
jnana-yoga  A  form  of  spiritual  discipline  mainly  based  upon  philosophical 
discrimination  between  the  real  and  the  unreal,  and  the  renunciation  of  the 
unreal. 

jnana-yogi  A  follower  of  jnana-yoga. 


Glossary  213 

jnani  One  who  follows  the  path  of  reasoning  and  discrimination  to  realize 
Ultimate  Truth;  generally  used  to  denote  a  non-dualist. 

Jumna  A  sacred  river  of  India. 

Kali  (Lit.,  the  Black  One.)  An  epithet  of  the  Divine  Mother;  the  Primal 
Energy. 

Kalidasa  The  great  Sanskrit  poet  and  author  of  Sakuntala. 

Kaliyuga  The  fourth  of  the  cycles  or  world  periods.  According  to  Hindu 
mythology  the  duration  of  the  world  is  divided  into  four  yugas,  namely, 
Satya,  Treta,  Dwapara,  and  Kali.  In  the  first,  also  known  as  the  Golden  Age, 
there  is  a  great  preponderance  of  virtue  among  men,  but  with  each  succeeding 
yuga  virtue  diminishes  and  vice  increases.  In  the  Kaliyuga  there  is  a  minimum 
of  virtue  and  a  great  excess  of  vice.  The  world  is  said  to  be  now  passing 
through  the  Kaliyuga. 

Kamalakanta  A  mystic  poet  of  Bengal. 

karma  Action  in  general;  duty.  The  Vedas  use  the  word  chiefly  to  denote 
ritualistic  worship  and  humanitarian  action. 

karma-yoga  A  spiritual  discipline,  mainly  discussed  in  the  Bhagavad  Gita, 
based  upon  the  unselfish  performance  of  duty. 

karma-yogi  A  follower  of  karma-yoga. 

Keshab  Chandra  Sen  See  Sen,  Keshab  Chandra. 

Krishna  An  Incarnation  of  God  described  in  the  Mahabharata  and  the 
Bhagavata. 

kshattriya  A  member  of  the  second  or  warrior  caste  in  Hindu  society. 

Kundalini  (Lit.,  coiled-up  serpent.)  The  word  refers  to  the  spiritual  power 
dormant  in  all  living  beings.  When  awakened  through  the  practice  of  spiritual 
disciplines,  it  rises  through  the  spinal  column,  passes  through  various  centres, 
and  at  last  reaches  the  brain,  when  the  yogi  experiences  samadhi  or  total 
absorption  in  the  Godhead. 

Kurukshetra  A  place  near  modern  Delhi,  where  the  great  battle  described  in 
the  Mahabharata  was  fought. 

Lakshmi  The  Consort  of  Vishnu  and  Goddess  of  Fortune. 

lingam  The  phallic  symbol  associated  with  Siva. 

Madhva  Same  as  Madhvacharya. 

Madhvacharya  The  chief  exponent  of  Dualistic  Vedanta  (A.  D.  1199-1276). 

Mahabharata  A  celebrated  Hindu  epic. 

mahasamadhi  The  highest  state  of  God-consciousness;  the  word  also  signifies 
the  death  of  an  illumined  person. 

mahatma  Great  soul. 

mahatman  Great  soul. 

Malabar  The  southwestern  part  of  India. 

mantra  Sacred  word  by  which  the  spiritual  teacher  initiates  his  disciple;  sacred 
word  in  general;  Vedic  hymn.  Of  the  two  main  sections  of  the  Vedas,  the 
Mantra  and  Brahmana,  the  Mantra  section  describes  the  hymns  used  in  the 
sacrifices. 


214 


Vivekananda 


math  Monastery. 

maya  A  term  of  Vedanta  philosophy  denoting  ignorance  obscuring  the  vision 
of  Reality;  the  cosmic  illusion  on  account  of  which  the  One  appears  as  many, 
the  Absolute  as  the  relative. 

Meru  A  mythical  mountain  abounding  in  gold  and  precious  stones.  The  abode 
of  Brahma,  the  Creator,  and  a  meeting-place  for  the  gods,  demigods,  rishis, 
and  other  supernatural  beings,  Meru  is  regarded  as  the  axis  around  which  the 
planets  revolve. 

Mirabai  A  celebrated  woman  saint  of  India. 

mlechcha  A  non-Hindu,  a  barbarian.  This  is  a  term  of  reproach  applied  by 
orthodox  Hindus  to  foreigners,  who  do  not  conform  to  the  established  usages 
of  Hindu  religion  and  society.  The  word  corresponds  to  the  “heathen”  of 
the  Christians  and  the  “kafir”  of  the  Mussulmans. 

mukti  Liberation  from  the  bondage  of  the  world,  which  is  the  goal  of  spiritual 
practice. 

Narayana  An  epithet  of  Vishnu,  or  the  Godhead. 

Nimbarka  A  great  Hindu  philosopher. 

Nirvana  Final  absorption  in  Brahman,  or  the  All-pervading  Reality,  through 
the  annihilation  of  the  individual  ego. 

nirvikalpa  samadhi  The  highest  state  of  samadhi,  in  which  the  aspirant  realizes 
his  total  oneness  with  Brahman. 

ojas  Virility. 

Om  The  most  sacred  word  of  the  Vedas;  also  written  Aum.  It  is  a  symbol  both 
of  the  Personal  God  and  of  the  Absolute. 

Panchavati  A  group  of  five  sacred  trees  planted  by  Sri  Ramakrishna  in  the 
temple  garden  at  Dakshineswar  for  his  practice  of  spiritual  discipline. 

pandit  Scholar. 

Panini  The  famous  Sanskrit  grammarian;  also  the  grammar  written  by  Panini. 

paramahamsa  One  belonging  to  the  highest  order  of  sannyasins. 

Patanjali  The  author  of  the  Yoga  system,  one  of  the  six  systems  of  orthodox 
Hindu  philosophy,  dealing  with  concentration  and  its  methods,  control  of 
the  mind,  and  similar  matters. 

prakriti  Primordial  nature;  the  material  substratum  of  the  creation,  consisting 
of  sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas.  See  gunas. 

prana  The  vital  breath,  which  sustains  life  in  a  physical  body;  the  primal 
energy  or  force,  of  which  other  physical  forces  are  manifestations.  In  the 
books  on  Yoga,  prana  is  described  as  having  five  modifications,  according  to 
its  five  different  bodily  functions:  (1)  prana  (which  controls  the  breath), 
(2)  apana  (which  carries  downward  unassimilated  food  and  drink),  (3) 
vyana  (which  pervades  the  entire  body),  (4)  udana  (by  which  the  contents 
of  the  stomach  are  ejected  through  the  mouth,  and  by  which  the  soul  is 
conducted  from  the  body  at  death),  and  (5)  samana  (which  carries  nutrition 
throughout  the  body).  Prana  is  also  a  name  of  Saguna  Brahman,  or  Brahman 
with  attributes. 


Glossary 


215 


puja  Ritualistic  worship. 

Puranas  Books  of  Hindu  mythology. 

Purusha  (Lit.,  person.)  A  term  of  Samkhya  philosophy  denoting  the  indi¬ 
vidual  conscious  principle.  In  Vedanta  the  term  Purusha  denotes  the  Self. 

rajas  The  principle  of  restlessness  or  activity  in  nature.  See  gunas. 
raja-yoga  A  system  of  yoga  ascribed  to  Patanjali,  dealing  with  concentration 
and  its  methods,  control  of  the  mind,  samadhi,  and  similar  matters. 

Rama  The  hero  of  the  Ramayana,  regarded  by  the  Hindus  as  a  Divine  In¬ 
carnation. 

Ramakrishna  A  great  saint  of  Bengal,  regarded  as  a  Divine  Incarnation 
(A.  D.  1836-1886). 

Ramanuja  Same  as  Ramanujacharya. 

Ramanujacharya  A  great  saint  of  Southern  India,  the  foremost  interpreter  of 
the  school  of  Qualified  Non-dualistic  Vedanta  (A.  D.  1017-1137). 

Ramayana  A  famous  Hindu  epic. 

rishi  A  seer  of  Truth  to  whom  the  wisdom  of  the  Vedas  was  revealed;  a 
general  name  for  saint  or  ascetic. 

Sakti  Power,  generally  the  Creative  Power  of  Brahman;  a  name  of  the  Divine 
Mother. 

samadhi  Ecstasy,  trance,  communion  with  God. 

Samkhya  One  of  the  six  systems  of  orthodox  Hindu  philosophy,  founded  by 
Kapila;  it  teaches  that  the  universe  evolves  as  the  result  of  the  union  of 
prakriti  (nature)  and  Purusha  (Spirit). 

Sankara  Same  as  Sankaracharya. 

Sankaracharya  One  of  the  greatest  saints  and  philosophers  of  India,  the  fore¬ 
most  exponent  of  Advaita  Vedanta  (A.  D.  788-820). 
sannyasa  The  monastic  life;  the  last  of  the  four  stages  of  life.  See  asrama. 
sannyasin  A  Hindu  monk  who  has  renounced  the  world  in  order  to  realize 
God. 

Santih  Peace. 

Sarasvati  The  Goddess  of  Learning. 

Satchidananda  (Lit.,  Existence-Knowledge-Bliss  Absolute.)  A  name  of  Brah¬ 
man,  or  Ultimate  Reality. 

sattva  The  principle  of  balance  or  righteousness  in  nature.  See  gunas. 

Sen,  Keshab  Chandra  A  leader  of  the  Brahmo  Samaj  (A.  D.  1838-1884). 
sishya  Disciple. 

Sita  The  wife  of  Rama. 

Siva  The  Destroyer  God;  the  Third  Person  of  the  Hindu  Trinity,  the  other 
two  being  Brahma,  the  Creator,  and  Vishnu,  the  Preserver. 

Sonthals  A  primitive  tribe  of  Central  India. 

Sri  The  word  is  often  used  as  an  honorific  prefix  to  the  names  of  deities  and 
eminent  persons,  or  of  celebrated  books  generally  of  a  sacred  character;  also 
used  as  an  auspicious  sign  at  the  commencement  of  letters,  manuscripts,  etc; 
often  used  as  an  equivalent  of  the  English  term  Mr. 

£udra  A  member  of  the  fourth  or  labouring  caste  in  Hindu  society. 


216 


Vivekananda 


sutra  Aphorism. 

Swami  (Lit.,  lord.)  A  title  of  the  monks  belonging  to  the  Vedanta  school. 

Swamiji  A  term  of  endearment  and  respect  by  which  a  Swami  is  addressed. 

tamas  The  principle  of  dullness  or  inertia  in  nature.  See  gunas. 

Tantra  A  system  of  religious  philosophy  in  which  the  Divine  Mother,  or 
Power,  is  the  Ultimate  Reality;  also  the  scriptures  dealing  with  this  philos¬ 
ophy. 

tapasya  Austerity. 

Upanishads  The  well-known  Hindu  scriptures  containing  the  philosophy  of 
the  Vedas.  They  are  one  hundred  and  eight  in  number,  of  which  eleven  are 
called  major  Upanishads. 

vaifya  One  belonging  to  the  third  caste  in  Hindu  society,  the  members  of 
which  engage  in  agriculture,  commerce,  and  cattle-rearing. 

Vedanta  (Lit.,  the  essence  or  the  concluding  part  of  the  Vedas.)  A  system 
of  philosophy  mainly  based  upon  the  teachings  of  the  Upanishads,  the 
Bhagavad  Gita,  and  the  Vedanta  Sutras. 

Vedanta  Sutras  An  authoritative  treatise  on  Vedanta,  ascribed  to  Vyasa. 

Vedas  The  revealed  scriptures  of  the  Hindus,  consisting  of  the  Rig-Veda, 
Sama-Veda,  Yajur-Veda,  and  Atharva-Veda. 

Vidya  Knowledge  leading  to  liberation,  i.e.  to  the  realization  of  Ultimate 
Reality. 

Virat  Consciousness  limited  or  conditioned  by  the  upadhi,  or  limiting  adjunct, 
of  the  aggregate  of  gross  bodies;  an  epithet  of  the  Cosmic  Soul. 

Vishnu  (Lit.,  the  All-pervading  Spirit.)  The  Preserver  God;  the  Second  Per¬ 
son  of  the  Hindu  Trinity,  the  other  two  being  Brahma,  the  Creator,  and 
Siva,  the  Destroyer;  also  a  name  of  the  Supreme  Lord. 

Viswanath  An  epithet  of  Siva. 

viveka  Discrimination  between  the  real  and  the  unreal. 

Vrindavan  A  town  on  the  bank  of  the  Jumna  river,  associated  with  Sri 
Krishna’s  childhood. 

Yajur-Veda  One  of  the  four  Vedas.  See  Vedas. 

yoga  Union  of  the  individual  soul  and  the  Supreme  Soul;  the  discipline  by 
which  such  union  is  effected.  The  Yoga  system  of  philosophy,  ascribed  to 
Patanjali,  is  one  of  the  six  systems  of  orthodox  Hindu  philosophy,  and  deals 
with  the  realization  of  Truth  through  concentration  of  the  mind. 

yogi  One  who  practises  yoga. 


■ 


' 


“It  may  be  that  I  shall  find  it  good  to  get  outside  my  body 
—  to  cast  it  off  like  a  worn-out  garment.  But  I  shall  not 
cease  to  work.  I  shall  inspire  men  everywhere,  until  the 
world  shall  know  that  it  is  one  with  God.” 

—  SWAMI  VlVEKANANDA 


VTVEKANANDA 

Swami  Vivekananda  (1863-1902),  a  well-known 
figure  in  intellectual  and  religious  circles  in 
America  during  the  last  decade  of  the 
nineteenth  century  and  the  first  decade  of  the 
twentieth,  is  cherished  with  respect  and  af¬ 
fection  by  an  ever  increasing  number  of  readers 
of  his  books.  His  genius  was  revealed  to  the 
world  at  large  in  the  Parliament  of  Religions 
held  in  Chicago  in  1893,  where  he  indicated 
India’s  rightful  place  in  the  spiritual  map  of  the 
world.  The  first  cultural  ambassador  of  his 
motherland  to  the  West,  and  the  builder  of  the 
spiritual  bridge  connecting  the  two  hemispheres, 
Vivekananda  dreamt  of  One  World  based  upon 
a  synthesis  of  religion  and  science  and  a 
knowledge  of  the  solidarity  of  mankind.  In  his 
utterances  the  souls  of  East  and  West,  the  one 
oppressed  by  the  tyranny  of  society  and  the 
other  by  the  dead  weight  of  secularism,  found 
the  way  to  freedom.  As  Ramakrishna,  the  teacher, 
reinterpreted  and  relived  for  the  modern  world 
the  spiritual  heritage  of  India,  so  Vivekananda, 
the  disciple,  anticipates  and  inspires  her  poten¬ 
tial  contribution. 


VIVEKANANDA:  A  BIOGRAPHY  by  Swami  Nikhilananda. 
With  twenty-eight  photographs  and  an  Appendix  con¬ 
taining  some  of  Swami  Vivekananda’s  most  important 


statements  on  religion  and  philosophy. 